A Novel Neural Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N-Wasp ) Binding Protein , Wish , Induces Arp2 and 3 Complex Activation Independent of Cdc42
We identified a novel adaptor protein that contains a Src homology ( SH ) 3 domain , SH3 binding proline rich sequences , and a leucine zipper like motif and termed this protein WASP interacting SH3 protein ( WISH ) .
WISH is expressed predominantly in neural tissues and testis .
It bound Ash and Grb2 through its proline rich regions and neural Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein ( N-WASP ) through its SH3 domain .
WISH strongly enhanced N-WASP-induced Arp2 and 3 complex activation independent of Cdc42 in vitro , resulting in rapid actin polymerization .
Furthermore , coexpression of WISH and N-WASP induced marked formation of microspikes in Cos7 cells , even in the absence of stimuli .
An N WASP mutant ( H208D ) that can not bind Cdc42 still induced microspike formation when coexpressed with WISH .
We also examined the contribution of WISH to a rapid actin polymerization induced by brain extract in vitro .
Arp2 and 3 complex was essential for brain extract induced rapid actin polymerization .
Addition of WISH to extracts increased actin polymerization as Cdc42 did .
However , WISH unexpectedly could activate actin polymerization even in N-WASP-depleted extracts .
These findings suggest that WISH activates Arp2 and 3 complex through N-WASP-dependent and -independent pathways without Cdc42 , resulting in the rapid actin polymerization required for microspike formation .
Introduction
Ash and Grb2 is an adaptor protein composed of one central Src homology ( SH ) 2 domain and two flanking SH3 domains .
The SH2 domain of Ash and Grb2 receives signals from several upstream target proteins including EGF receptor , PDGF receptor ( ) , Shc ( ) , and insulin receptor 1 ( IRS1 ) ( ) through binding to the specific phosphotyrosine containing motif on the target protein .
Signals received at the SH2 domain are transmitted downstream through SH3 domain binding proteins .
A recent study has shown that the SH3 domains of Ash and Grb2 bind to a variety of proline rich proteins including Sos , synaptojanin ( : ) , dynamin , c-Cbl ( ) , Abl ( ) , Ack , and neural Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein ( N-WASP ) .
Thus , Ash and Grb2 appears to play important roles not only in mitogenic signaling through Ras activation but also in the reorganization of actin filaments and endocytosis .
It is already well known that the Rho family of small G protein , including Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 , act as molecular switches by cycling between the active GTP bound and the inactive GDP bound states to regulate the actin cytoskeleton ( ) .
Rho primarily regulates development of actin stress fibers ; Rac stimulates formation of lamellipodia or membrane ruffling ; and Cdc42 induces the formation of filopodia ( ) .
Downstream signals from Ash and Grb2 are found to " cross-talk " with these G proteins , resulting in reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton .
Indeed , N-WASP , an Ash and Grb2 binding protein , induces filopodium formation that is dependent on Cdc42 ( ) .
N-WASP possesses a GTPase binding domain/Cdc42/Rac interactive binding region ( GBD and CRIB ) motif through which N-WASP binds directly to the active form of Cdc42 ( ) .
We have also shown that the verprolin homology domain ( V ) of N-WASP , which is an actin binding site , is essential for filopodium formation ( ) , and the cofilin like domain ( C ) and acidic ( A ) region in the COOH terminus of N-WASP are Arp2 and 3 complex binding sites ( ) .
Furthermore , it has been shown that Arp2 and 3 complex is markedly activated by the verplorin homology , cofilin homology , and acidic region ( VCA ) region of N-WASP .
This is the minimal essential region for the activation of Arp2 and 3 complex .
However , the full-length N-WASP protein was found to be a less potent activator of Arp2 and 3 complex than the VCA protein , suggesting that the VCA region is masked in the full-length protein and is exposed by interaction with other activating factors .
Thus far , addition of Cdc42 and phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate ( PIP 2 ) has been shown to increase the activity of full-length N-WASP to the level induced by VCA protein ( ) .
Recently , other VCA region containing proteins have been identified and named WASP family verplorin-homologous protein ( WAVE ) / Scar .
WAVEs appear to function downstream of Rac and induce membrane ruffling .
Thus , it has been made clear that WASP and WAVE family proteins can bind and activate Arp2 and 3 complex through the VCA region , resulting in rapid actin polymerization .
In this study , we identified a novel Ash and Grb2 binding protein that contains an SH3 domain , SH3 binding proline rich sequences , and a leucine zipper like motif .
We named this protein WASP interacting SH3 protein ( WISH ) , because WISH binds N-WASP through its SH3 domain .
In addition , we demonstrate that WISH further enhances N-WASP-induced Arp2 and 3 complex activation independent of Cdc42 in vitro .
Furthermore , coexpression of WISH and N-WASP induces marked formation of microspikes in Cos7 cells even in the absence of stimuli , and an N WASP mutant ( H208D ) that can not bind Cdc42 also induced microspike formation when coexpressed with WISH .
Using N-WASP-depleted brain extracts , we also showed that WISH has an alternative route in addition to the route via N-WASP , to activate Arp2 and 3 complex in brain extract induced rapid actin polymerization .
Materials and Methods
Glutathione S-Transferase Fusion Proteins
Glutathione S-transferase ( GST ) - Ash and Grb2 ( ) , GST-AshN , GST-AshC ( ) , GST-phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase ( PI 3-kinase ) 85-kD subunit ( p85 ) SH3 ( ) , PLCgamma1 SH3 ( ) , GST-Nck SH3 ( ) , GST-Fyn SH3 ( ) , and GST-CA ( ) were purified as described .
Bacterial expression plasmids coding various GST fusion proteins of WISH were produced by in-frame insertion of fragments corresponding to each region as shown in C into pGEX plasmids ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) .
GST-SH3 ( 1-132 amino acids ) expression plasmid was made by cutting the cDNA of mouse WISH , and inserting it into pGEX-4T-3 .
GST-Pro ( 132-268 amino acids ) , GST-Mid ( 240-442 amino acids ) , and GST-Leu ( 442-611 amino acids ) were produced by in-frame insertion of a PCR amplified fragment corresponding to each sequence into the BamHI-EcoRI site of pGEX-2T .
GST-C ( 611-711 amino acids ) was produced by in-frame insertion of a PCR amplified fragment into the BamHI-XhoI site of pGEX-4T-1 .
The recombinant plasmids were transformed into XL-I Blue strain Escherichia coli and induced to express GST fusion proteins with IPTG .
The bacteria were collected by centrifugation and resuspended in E. coli lysis buffer ( 40 mM Tris-HCl , pH 7.5 , 5 mM EDTA , 0.1 mM PMSF , 0.1 mM diisopropyl fluorophosphate , and 1 % Triton X-100 ) .
Vigorous sonication was performed before centrifugation at 100,000 g for 30 min .
The resulting supernatants were stored as crude extracts containing GST fusion proteins .
GST-Cdc42 and GST-N-WASP proline rich region ( GST-NW-Pro , 265-391 amino acids ) was expressed in Sf9 cells using recombinant baculoviruses , which were produced using the BAC-TO-BAC system ( GIBCO BRL ) .
They were mixed with glutathione-agarose beads and washed five times with 0.05 % Tween 20 in PBS , and then eluted by 50 mM glutathione in PBS .
Glutathione in the samples was removed by dialysis before use .
cDNA Cloning of WISH
The mouse skeletal muscle C2 myoblast cDNA expression library constructed in lambdaZAPII was screened with GST-Ash and Grb2 .
Positive plaques were detected using anti-GST antibody ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) .
Positive phage clone inserted DNA fragments were excised into pBluescript II KS ( - ) ( Stratagene ) and sequenced .
The clone encoding WISH ( 2,848 bases ) included a single open reading frame of 711 amino acids as shown in A.
Northern Hybridization of WISH mRNA
The WISH cDNA was labeled with [ alpha- 32 P ] dCTP ( Amersham ) and used as a probe for Northern blot analysis .
Total RNA was purified from various tissues of rat .
A sample ( 10 mug ) was used for electrophoresis and then transferred to a nylon membrane .
The membrane was hybridized with the probe overnight .
Then , autoradiography was performed overnight on x-ray film ( Eastman Kodak Co. ) with an intensifying screen .
Antibodies
Polyclonal antibody against WISH was produced as follows : partial cDNA fragments encoding amino acids 1-132 ( SH3 ) and 132-268 ( Pro ) were ligated into the BamHI-SacI site and BamHI-KpnI site of pQE32 His-tag expression vector ( QIAGEN ) , respectively .
The His tagged proteins ( His-WISH-SH3 , His-Pro ) were expressed in E. coli and purified with [ Ni 2 + ] nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose as described by the manufacturer .
The purified proteins were injected as an antigen into rabbits to raise polyclonal antiserum .
The resulting antibody was collected by ammonium sulfate precipitation and affinity purified with the antigen proteins immobilized on CNBr activated Sepharose ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) .
Antibodies against synaptojanin , N-WASP , WAVE , and Arp3 were produced as described previously ( ; ; Miki et al. .
1998b ; , respectively ) .
Anti-Ash and Grb2 , anti-Sos , anti-c-Cbl , and anti-Myc antibodies were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc. .
The His-tag antibody was purchased from QIAGEN .
Ectopic Expression in Cos7
The full-length cDNA of mouse WISH expression plasmids was constructed in the pCMV ( myc tagged ) or the pcDL-SRalpha plasmid vector .
Wild-type and mutant N WASP ( H208D ) were constructed in the pcDL-SRalpha plasmid vector ( Miki et al. .
1996 ) .
To obtain cell lysates , 20 mug of recombinant plasmid of full-length WISH was mixed with 10 7 cells , and the mixtures were subjected to electroporation with a Gene Pulser ( Bio-Rad Laboratories ) .
The cells were cultured in DME supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum .
After 48 h , the cells were harvested with lysis buffer ( 20 mM Tris-HCl , pH 7.4 , 150 mM sodium chloride , 5 mM EDTA , 2 mM EGTA , 50 mM sodium fluoride , 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate , 1 mM sodium vanadate , 1 mM PMSF , 10 mug and ml aprotinin , 10 mug and ml leupeptin , and 1 % Triton X-100 ) .
For immunofluorescence microscopy , 5 x 10 4 cells were plated on 35-mm dishes with coverslips .
After 16 h , 4 mug of plasmid DNA was introduced by Ca 2 + - phosphate precipitation .
The cells were serum starved for 16 h , and then stimulated with or without 0.1 mug and ml EGF for 5 min and fixed .
In Vitro Binding Assays with GST Fusion Proteins
Several GST fusion proteins expressed in E. coli were immobilized on glutathine-agarose beads and mixed with histidine tagged proteins .
After being washed with the buffer ( 0.05 % Tween 20 in PBS ) , the beads were suspended in SDS sample buffer and subjected to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis .
Metabolic Labeling of N1E-115 Cells
For the preparation of [ 35 S ] methionine labeled N1E-115 cell lysates , semiconfluent cells were placed in methionine-free medium and incubated with 100 muCi and dish ( 150 mm diameter ) of [ 35 S ] methionine for 3 h .
After treatment , the cells were harvested and immunoprecipitated with preimmune serum or anti-WISH antibody .
The precipitates were subjected to SDS-PAGE , and then autoradiography for 3 d with x-ray films ( Eastman Kodak Co. ) .
Immunoprecipitation
Cos7 cell lysates or N1E-115 cell lysates were mixed with 10 mug of anti-Myc antibody , anti-WISH antibody , or preimmune rabbit serum ( negative control ) for 1 h. Then , protein A- and G-agarose beads were added , and the mixtures were incubated for another 1 h .
The immunoprecipitates were washed three times with lysis buffer , and then analyzed by Western blotting .
Cell lysate ( 1 mug ) was also added as a positive control .
Purification of Actin , Arp2 and 3 Complex , and N-WASP
Actin was purified from rabbit skeletal muscle and monomeric actin was isolated by gel filtration on Superdex 200 ( Amersham Pharmacia Biotech ) in G buffer ( 2 mM Tris-HCl , pH 8.0 , 0.2 mM CaC l 2 , 0.5 mM DTT , 0.2 mM ATP ) .
The Arp2 and 3 complex was purified from bovine brain extracts by a previously described protocol ( Rohatgi et al. .
1999 ) .
N-WASP was prepared with a baculovirus system as described previously ( Miki et al. .
1998a ) .
Actin Polymerization Assay
Actin polymerization was measured by monitoring the change in fluorescence intensity of pyrene labeled actin as described previously ( Rohatgi et al. .
1999 ) .
To follow actin polymerization using purified components , pyrene labeled G-actin or unlabeled G-actin was isolated by incubating freshly thawed proteins in G buffer ( 5 mM Tris-HCl , pH 8.0 , 0.2 mM CaCl 2 , 0.2 mM ATP , 0.2 mM DTT ) for 12 h at 4degreesC and then removing residual F-actin by centrifugation at 40,000 g for 1 h .
The GST-Cdc42 fusion proteins were mixed with 10 times the amount of GTPgammaS and incubated for 10 min at 30degreesC .
Then the reaction was stopped by adding 10 mM MgCl 2 .
Polymerization reaction mixtures contained 2 muM unlabeled actin , 0.2 muM pyrene labeled actin , 0.2 mM ATP , and various proteins in 80 mul of X buffer ( 10 mM Hepes , pH 7.6 , 100 mM KCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 0.1 mM EDTA , and 1 mM DTT ) and were preincubated for 5 min .
The reaction was started by adding a mixture of actin and pyrene labeled actin to the preincubated protein mixtures , and fluorescence change was measured at 407 nm with excitation at 365 nm in a fluorescence spectrometer ( Jasco ) .
All kinetic analyses were performed using the software provided by the manufacturer .
For the actin polymerization assays using bovine brain lysates , bovine brain extracts were prepared according to the method described previously ( ) .
The reaction mixture was prepared by mixing 10 mul of bovine brain extract , 10 mul of the ATP regenerating mix , 80 mul of X buffer , 100 muM GTPgammaS , and final 0.4 muM pyrene labeled actin .
The reaction mixture was preincubated for 10 min .
Then , GST-Cdc42 ( GTPgammaS loaded ) , WISH , Ash , or Fyn SH3 was added before fluorescence was monitored .
Immunofluorescence Microscopic Analysis
Cells cultured on coverslips were fixed and stored in 3.7 % formaldehyde in PBS .
For immunofluorescence staining , cells were first permeabilized with 0.2 % Triton X-100 for 5 min and then incubated with primary antibodies such as anti-Myc , anti-N-WASP , and anti-WISH antibodies for 60 min .
After washing , they were incubated with secondary antibodies linked to fluorescein or Cy5 ( Cy5 conjugated antibody was used only in triple staining experiments ) .
To visualize actin filaments , rhodamine conjugated phalloidin ( Molecular Probes ) was also added during the incubation with the secondary antibodies .
After a 30-min incubation , coverslips were washed and mounted on slide glasses .
Cells were observed with a confocal laser scanning microscope ( model MRC 1024 ; Bio-Rad Laboratories ) .
Real-time Observation of Microspike Formation
Cos7 cells were starved for 24 h with serum-free DME , and microinjection was performed with an Eppendorf microinjector .
After injection , cells were observed with a phase-contrast microscope .
Proteins ( WISH and and or N-WASP ) which were purified as described above were injected at a final concentration of 4 muM .
Results
Identification of an Ash and Grb2-binding Protein , WISH
To clarify the downstream signaling of Ash and Grb2 , we searched for binding proteins by screening a lambdaZAPII cDNA expression library of mouse skeletal muscle C2 myoblasts with GST-Ash and Grb2 fusion proteins expressed in E. coli .
We isolated clones that encoded Ash and Grb2 binding proteins including c-Cbl , dynamin , and Ack , as well as several novel proteins .
Among the novel clones , there was a 2,848-bp cDNA ( sequence data available from GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ under accession no .
AF130313 ) containing an open reading frame that encodes a 711-amino acid protein ( A ) .
We named this protein WASP interacting SH3 protein ( WISH ) because it was found to be an N-WASP activating protein .
The predicted amino acid sequence had an SH3 domain at the NH 2 terminus and three class II-type SH3 binding motifs .
A leucine zipper like motif and a serine rich sequence with overlapping proline rich sequences were also found .
Three clusters of three to five leucine residues were located in the latter half of the protein .
To confirm that the cDNA encoded full-length WISH protein , we checked the size of the protein expressed in Cos7 cells by Western blot analysis .
As shown in C , WISH specific antibody reacted with a protein expressed in Cos7 cells .
The molecular mass of this protein was the same as that of the endogenous protein ( 90 kD ) from rat brain ( C ) , indicating that the cDNA clone encodes the full-length WISH protein .
Tissue Distribution of WISH
To examine the tissue distribution of WISH , we performed Northern hybridization analysis with total RNA from various rat tissues .
As shown in A , WISH mRNA ( 2.8 kb ) was expressed predominantly in brain and testis .
In addition , a 2.5-kb mRNA that may represent an alternatively spliced product of the WISH mRNA was also detected exclusively in testis .
Next , we studied the distribution of WISH protein in various rat tissues using an anti-WISH antibody .
WISH was abundant in brain and was present in moderate amounts in thymus , spleen , and testis , but no positive signal was detected in other tissues ( B ) , which was consistent with the Northern hybridization data .
To determine the distribution of WISH in brain , its expression in each region of rat brain including cerebrum , cerebellum , diencephalon , and medulla oblongata was analyzed by Western blotting with anti-WISH antibody .
A 90-kD positive signal was detected in all regions examined ( data not shown ) .
We then examined expression of WISH in a variety of cell lines by Western blotting and found that neuronal cell lines N1E-115 and PC12 contained larger amounts of WISH than Cos7 cells , Balb 3T3 cells , and C3H10T1 and 2 cells ( data not shown ) .
WISH Associates with Ash and Grb2 SH3 Domains via Proline rich Sequences
To confirm the association between WISH and Ash and Grb2 , we performed coimmunoprecipitation experiments .
Myc tagged full-length WISH expression plasmids ( Myc-WISH ) and empty vectors ( Myc-vec ) were transfected transiently into Cos7 cells , and interactions were detected by Western blot analysis after precipitation with anti-Myc antibody ( A ) .
Only immunoprecipitates from Myc tagged WISH transfected cell lysates contained Ash and Grb2 ( A , lane 2 ) .
The positive signal was specific , as anti-Myc immunoprecipitates from cells transfected with empty vector did not give positive signal ( A , lane 1 ) .
The two bands above the Ash and Grb2 band in A are the light chains of the anti-Myc antibody .
We then examined whether endogenous WISH associates with Ash and Grb2 by immunoprecipitation with anti-WISH antibody using N1E-115 cell lysates .
B shows that endogenous WISH associated with Ash and Grb2 in N1E-115 cells as well .
WISH has putative SH3 binding motifs ( proline rich sequences ) as described above .
To clarify whether these proline rich sequences in WISH can associate with the SH3 domain of Ash and Grb2 , we used a variety of GST fusion proteins of Ash and Grb2 such as full-length Ash and Grb2 ( GST-Ash ) , the NH 2 -terminal SH3 domain ( GST-AshN ) , and the COOH-terminal SH3 domain ( GST-AshC ) , and the histidine tagged proline rich sequence of WISH ( His-Pro , amino acids 132-268 ) , and carried out in vitro binding assays .
As shown in C , both SH3 domains of Ash and Grb2 bound strongly to the proline rich sequences in WISH .
SH3 domains of the 85-kD subunit of PI 3-kinase and PLCgamma1 also bound to the proline rich sequences in WISH in vitro ( data not shown ) .
WISH Binds to N-WASP via Its SH3 Domain
To investigate WISH signaling , we searched for WISH binding proteins in N1E-115 cell lysates prelabeled with [ 35 S ] methionine by immunoprecipitation with anti-WISH antibody .
As shown in A , several proteins were found to coprecipitate specifically with WISH .
Among them , the band at 65 kD was particularly strong .
We postulated that this protein was N-WASP , because N-WASP is a 65-kD protein and possesses a proline rich region that may serve as a target for the WISH SH3 domain .
To confirm this possibility , we examined anti-WISH immunoprecipitates with various antibodies against proteins such as Sos , c-Cbl , synaptojanin , and WAVE that contain proline rich regions .
As shown in B , only N-WASP was coimmunoprecipitated .
Sos , c-Cbl , and synaptojanin were not associated with WISH .
Another WASP family protein , WAVE , which also has a proline rich sequence ( Miki et al. .
1998b ) , was not coimmunoprecipitated with WISH , suggesting that WISH-SH3 bound specifically to N-WASP .
To confirm that the SH3 domain of WISH is required for association with N-WASP , we made various deletion constructs of WISH as GST fusion proteins ( C ) and studied the abilities of these fusion proteins to bind N-WASP ( D ) .
As expected , the full-length and SH3 domain of WISH bound N-WASP .
Furthermore , it was found that the SH3 domain of WISH ( His-WISH-SH3 , 1-132 amino acids ) bound the proline rich region of N-WASP ( GST-NW-Pro , 265-391 amino acids ) ( E ) .
WISH Further Stimulates N-WASP-induced Arp2 and 3 Complex Activation
Because WISH bound specifically to N-WASP , we examined whether WISH could further stimulate N-WASP-induced Arp2 and 3 complex activation in vitro .
Actin polymerization can be monitored with pyrene labeled actin , a fluorescent derivative of actin that exhibits higher fluorescence intensity when actin is assembled into filaments .
Using a cell-free system , we measured the effect of N-WASP and WISH on Arp2 and 3 complex induced actin polymerization .
All proteins used in this experiment are shown in A .
The GST-VCA fusion protein of N-WASP ( VCA ) markedly activated Arp2 and 3 complex induced actin polymerization ( B ) as described previously ( Rohatgi et al. .
, 1999 ) .
In contrast , full-length N-WASP was not as potent as VCA .
Addition of GST-Cdc42 fusion protein ( Cdc42 ) to N-WASP in this system increased Arp2 and 3 complex induced actin polymerization to the level evoked by VCA in the presence of PIP 2 ( data not shown ) , but addition of Cdc42 without PIP 2 did not increase activity to that of VCA ( B ) .
Surprisingly , addition of GST-WISH fusion protein ( WISH ) to N-WASP increased the Arp2 and 3 complex induced actin polymerization to the level induced by VCA even in the absence of Cdc42 .
Addition of Cdc42 did not increase activity any further ( B ) .
WISH did not activate Arp2 and 3 complex directly without N-WASP ( B ) .
We then checked whether GST fusion proteins of other SH3 proteins such as Ash and Grb2 ( Ash ) , Fyn , Nck , Ash and Grb2 NH 2 -terminal SH3 domain ( AshN ) , p85 , and PLCgamma1 ( PLCgamma ) also activate Arp2 and 3 complex as well .
Ash and AshN stimulated N-WASP-induced Arp2 and 3 complex activation ( C ) as described previously ( ) , but they were less effective than WISH .
The SH3 domains from Fyn , PLCgamma , Nck , and p85 also activated N-WASP .
However , these SH3 proteins were not as potent as Ash .
In contrast , WISH-SH3 ( SH3 ) caused significant and tremendous activation of N-WASP .
Thus , WISH was found to be the strongest activator of N-WASP among the SH3 proteins examined .
Interestingly , Cdc42 was not necessary for the activation to the level induced by VCA .
This activation was detected only with the SH3 domain of WISH ( C ) .
Basic proteins that do not contain SH3 domains , such as myelin basic protein ( MBP ; Upstate Biotechnology ) , did not activate N-WASP at all , suggesting that activation was not merely due to ionic interaction ( C ) .
We further examined the concentration dependent effect on actin polymerization ( D ) .
Both SH3 domains of WISH and full-length WISH increased the initial actin polymerization rate in a concentration dependent manner , and their activation potencies were higher than those of other SH3 domains , such as AshN and Fyn .
Thus far , it has been thought that the N-WASP VCA region , which is masked under resting conditions , is exposed by binding of Cdc42 to the GBD and CRIB motif of N-WASP .
Taken together , these results present the idea that WISH alone can expose the VCA region of N-WASP by binding to the proline rich region of N-WASP independent of Cdc42 .
Depletion of WISH from Bovine Brain Extracts Decreases Actin Polymerization Activity of Bovine Brain Extracts
Addition of Cdc42 to extracts of neutrophils ( ) or Xenopus oocytes ( ) induces an increase in actin polymerization .
In addition , WASP dependent actin comets have also been shown to be formed in bovine brain extracts ( Yarar et al. 1999 ) .
Thus , we further applied bovine brain extracts instead of purified proteins to examine the involvement of WISH in actin polymerization under a condition that more closely reflects the in vivo situation .
Addition of bovine brain extracts induced actin polymerization in the presence of Cdc42 .
To address whether WISH , N-WASP , or Arp2 and 3 complex contributes to actin polymerization activity in brain extracts , WISH , N-WASP , and Arp2 and 3 complex were depleted with anti-WISH antibody , anti-N-WASP antibody , and GST-CA protein treatment , respectively ( A ) .
In WISH depleted extracts , 90 % of WISH was removed , whereas N-WASP levels remained constant ( A ) .
Approximately 98 % of N-WASP or 95 % of Arp2 and 3 complex was removed in the respective depleted extract .
These depleted extracts were used to examine the roles of Arp2 and 3 complex , N-WASP , and WISH in brain extract induced actin polymerization .
Addition of Cdc42 or WISH to mock treated extracts increased initial actin polymerization markedly , but Fyn SH3 did not ( B , a ) .
On the other hand , the maximal actin polymerization levels that were attained up to 100 min were similar for Mock , Mock + Cdc42 , and Mock + WISH ( data not shown ) , suggesting that WISH activates the initial rate of actin polymerization .
As expected , Cdc42 , WISH , and WISH-SH3 activated the initial actin polymerization rate ( B , b ) .
Arp2 and 3 complex was essential for brain extract induced actin polymerization , because addition of Cdc42 or WISH to Arp2 and 3 complex depleted extracts did not restore activity ( C , a and b ) .
Adding back of Arp2 and 3 complex did restore polymerization activity ( data not shown ) .
WISH depletion did not affect basal activity without Cdc42 ( D , a and b ) , but addition of excess WISH to WISH depleted extracts increased actin polymerization activity ( , Da and Db ) .
N-WASP depletion also did not affect basal actin polymerization activity , but addition of WISH to N-WASP-depleted extracts increased the activity significantly ( E , a and b ) , although addition of Cdc42 increased the activity only slightly .
These findings suggest that WISH activates Arp2 and 3 complex not only in an N-WASP-dependent manner but also in an N-WASP-independent manner .
WISH and N-WASP Induce Microspike Formation Cooperatively In Vivo
To examine whether WISH stimulates N-WASP-induced microspike formation , WISH and N-WASP were coexpressed in Cos7 cells .
Expression of WISH or N-WASP alone did not cause any morphological changes in Cos7 cells ( A ) .
In response to EGF stimulation , however , N-WASP-expressing cells formed microspikes , whereas WISH expressing cells did not .
When WISH and N-WASP were coexpressed , microspike formation was induced even in the absence of EGF ( B ) , though the structure of actin filaments was also altered .
To clarify whether Cdc42 is necessary for N-WASP-induced microspike formation when WISH is present , we used an N WASP mutant ( H208D ) that can not bind Cdc42 ( ) .
H208D alone was not able to induce microspike formation even in the presence of EGF ( C , top panels ) .
However , coexpression of H208D and WISH did induce microspike formation ( C , bottom panels ) .
Real-time observation by phase-contrast microscopy revealed that these microspikes were filopodia but not retraction fibers ( D ) .
The numbers of cells that formed microspikes were also increased by coexpression of WISH and N-WASP or WISH and H208D ( E ) .
All these results indicate that WISH alone has an ability to activate N-WASP to induce microspike formation without the aid of Cdc42 .
Discussion
WISH Is a Novel Adaptor Protein That Activates N-WASP
WISH is a 90-kD protein that contains one SH3 domain at the NH 2 terminus and three SH3 binding sites , which are proline rich sequences .
WISH associates with SH3 domains in Ash and Grb2 through these proline rich sequences ( C ) , but it also associates with the SH3 domains of PLCgamma1 , Fyn , Nck , and PI 3-kinase 85-kD subunit in vitro .
WISH is probably recruited to the activated receptors for these proteins in response to extracellular stimuli as a downstream molecule in tyrosine kinase signaling .
Thus , WISH is thought to act as an adaptor protein that binds to SH3 domains of these proteins .
The NH 2 terminus of WISH contains an SH3 domain and was shown to form a complex with N-WASP ( ) .
Binding through the WISH-SH3 domain appears to be fairly specific because other proline rich proteins such as Sos , synaptojanin , c-Cbl , and WAVE , which are all known to bind various SH3 domains , did not bind WISH ( B ) .
N-WASP can activate Arp2 and 3 complex through the VCA region at its COOH terminus , resulting in rapid polymerization of actin ( Rohatgi et al. .
, 1999 ) .
The mechanism of N-WASP activation is explained as follows .
Under resting conditions , the VCA region essential for Arp2 and 3 complex activation is masked by an intramolecular interaction with the region containing the GBD and CRIB motif ( Miki et al. .
1998a ) .
When cells are stimulated , activated Cdc42 binds to the GBD and CRIB motif .
This leads to the exposure of the VCA region , where G-actin and Arp2 and 3 complex are recruited .
Consequently , actin polymerization is induced in the cortical area of cells , resulting in filopodium formation .
Indeed , GST-VCA protein remarkably activates Arp2 and 3 complex induced actin polymerization , indicating that the VCA region is the minimal essential region for Arp2 and 3 complex activation .
However , it should be noted that activated Cdc42 can only partially activate N-WASP and requires addition of PIP 2 to reach the activation level induced by GST-VCA protein ( ) .
We show here that an N-WASP binding protein , WISH , can also expose the VCA region of N-WASP and effectively enhance N-WASP-induced Arp2 and 3 complex activation ( B ) .
This activation is mediated by the binding through the SH3 domain of WISH , because the fusion protein containing the SH3 domain also has activating ability ( C ) .
Ash and Grb2 SH3 can also activate N-WASP ( ) but much less potently than WISH-SH3 did ( C ) .
In addition , other SH3 elements such as the SH3 of Fyn , Nck , PLCgamma1 , and PI 3-kinase 85-kD subunit cause only weak activation of N-WASP ( C ) .
WISH Activates Arp2 and 3 Complex induced Actin Polymerization Independent of Cdc42
More interestingly , WISH enhances N-WASP-induced Arp2 and 3 complex activation to the level of GST-VCA protein even in the absence of Cdc42 ( B ) , suggesting that binding of WISH to N-WASP is sufficient for full activation .
It is known that brain extracts induce WASP dependent actin comet formation ( ) .
In this case , addition of WISH instead of Cdc42 also activates actin polymerization to the level induced by Cdc42 ( B ) .
When WISH is added to N-WASP-depleted extracts , such activation is still observed .
In contrast , addition of Cdc42 to this system does not restore activity ( E ) .
This suggests that WISH activates Arp2 and 3 complex through both N-WASP-dependent and -independent pathways ( ) and that Cdc42 is not required for either pathway if WISH is present .
WASP and N-WASP also bind several proteins such as WIP and proline serine threonine phosphatase interacting protein ( PSTPIP ) .
These proteins may have N-WASP-activating activity as well , though their effects on N-WASP-induced activation of Arp2 and 3 complex have not been examined .
Possible Roles of WISH in Neuronal Cells
Both WISH and N-WASP are expressed predominantly in brain and neuronal cells ( ) .
Furthermore , WISH depletion experiments revealed that WISH is significantly involved in Arp2 and 3 complex induced actin polymerization by brain extracts ( D ) .
The axonal growth cone , which is a highly dynamic structure at the tip of the axon , consists of filopodial and lamellipodial protrusions that respond to both positive and negative external guidance cues .
Considering the fact that coexpression of WISH and N-WASP induces filopodium formation in Cos7 cells , it may be possible that WISH also acts for forming filopodia in neural cells , in which filopodium formation has been shown to be essential for neurite extension .
However , the precise functions of WISH in neural cells remain to be clarified .
