Raf Activation Is Regulated by Tyrosine 510 Phosphorylation in Drosophila
The proto-oncoprotein Raf is pivotal for mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) signaling , and its aberrant activation has been implicated in multiple human cancers .
However , the precise molecular mechanism of Raf activation , especially for B-Raf , remains unresolved .
By genetic and biochemical studies , we demonstrate that phosphorylation of tyrosine 510 is essential for activation of Drosophila Raf ( Draf ) , which is an ortholog of mammalian B-Raf .
Y510 of Draf is phosphorylated by the c-src homolog Src64B .
Acidic substitution of Y510 promotes and phenylalanine substitution impairs Draf activation without affecting its enzymatic activity , suggesting that Y510 plays a purely regulatory role .
We further show that Y510 regulates Draf activation by affecting the autoinhibitory interaction between the N- and C-terminal fragments of the protein .
Finally , we show that Src64B is required for Draf activation in several developmental processes .
Together , these results suggest a novel mechanism of Raf activation via Src mediated tyrosine phosphorylation .
Since Y510 is a conserved residue in the kinase domain of all Raf proteins , this mechanism is likely evolutionarily conserved .
Author Summary
Receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) / Ras signaling pathways control many different biological processes during metazoan development .
Mutations that disrupt this signaling pathway cause many human diseases , including cancer .
The proto-oncoprotein Raf functions downstream of Ras in transducing signals from RTK .
Activating mutations in both Ras and Raf have been linked to many types of human cancers .
Despite the importance of these oncoproteins in tumorigenesis , the molecular mechanisms of Raf activation remains unresolved .
Here , using a genetic screen in Drosophila , we show that the Src homolog Src64B is an activator of Drosophila Raf ( Draf ) .
Src64B phosphorylates tyrosine Y510 , in the Draf kinase domain and will activate a full-length Draf , but not a truncated Draf that contains only its kinase domain , suggesting that Y510 phosphorylation may relieve the autoinhibition of full-length Draf .
Since Y510 is conserved among all the members of the Raf protein family , its phosphorylation may serve as a mechanism of Raf regulation in general .
Phosphorylation of a conserved tyrosine residue located in the kinase domain of Raf family proteins can serve as a mechanism of Raf activation .
Introduction
The Raf serine and threonine kinase is a key component of the evolutionarily conserved signal transduction module that also includes the Ras GTPase , the mitogen and extracellular signaling regulated kinase kinase ( MEK ) , and the extracellular signaling regulated kinase ( ERK ) .
In the canonical model , receptor tyrosine kinase ( RTK ) activation by extracellular signals such as peptide ligands leads to , via a series of adaptor proteins , the activation of Ras , which switches from GDP- to GTP bound form .
Ras-GTP binds to and thus causes the translocation of Raf to the plasma membrane , where it is activated by mechanisms that are still not completely resolved .
It has been reported that somatic mutations in B-Raf are found in 60 % of malignant melanomas and are also associated with other types of human cancers , which underscores the importance of this signaling pathway in tumorigenesis .
The mammalian Raf family consists of A-Raf , B-Raf , and C-Raf ( also known as Raf-1 or c-Raf ) , which share three highly conserved regions ( CR1-3 ; see ) .
The sole Raf homolog present in the Drosophila genome , Draf , is encoded by lethal ( 1 ) pole hole ( phl ) ; it contains all three conserved domains and is most homologous to B-Raf and secondarily to C-Raf , with 61 % and 54 % overall sequence similarity , respectively .
Draf shares similar substrate specificity and regulatory mechanisms with C-Raf and very likely also with B-Raf , as expression of human C-Raf in Draf mutants can restore Draf signaling .
CR1 and 2 are located in the N-terminal regulatory region , which acts to repress the catalytic activity of kinase domain located in the C-terminal CR3 .
Two subdomains in CR1 , a Ras binding domain ( RBD ) and a cysteine rich domain ( CRD ) , are responsible for binding to Ras-GTP .
The mechanism of Raf activation is complex and , to date , not fully understood .
Numerous factors , including Ras , Ksr , CNK , 14-3-3 , Src , and others , have been reported to regulate Raf activation .
Binding to Ras-GTP , an important first step leading to Raf activation , serves to translocate Raf to the membrane and subject Raf to activation by other factors localized at the membrane [ ] .
Following Ras binding , modifications of Raf by phosphorylation that occur at the plasma membrane appear essential for Raf activation ( ) .
C-Raf is mainly phosphorylated on S338 , Y341 , T491 , and S494 following Ras induced activation , and numerous factors have been implicated in phosphorylating these sites .
S338 and Y341 reside in the " N region , " a negatively charged regulatory region located at the N-terminus of the kinase domain , about 20 amino acids from the ATP binding domain .
Phosphorylation of these sites is believed to play a role in relieving the inhibitory N-terminus from the C-terminal kinase domain .
The p21 activated kinase 3 ( PAK3 ) has been identified as a kinase capable of phosphorylating S338 .
Y341 is phosphorylated as a result of overexpression of activated Src family kinase ( SFK ) Src in cultured cells and in vitro , and substitution of this residue with the phosphomimetic aspartate increases C-Raf activity [ , - ] .
In addition , it has also been shown that Src activity is required for rapid activation of mitogen activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) signaling [ ] , and that Src can function downstream of RTK to induce Shc and Grb association , leading to Ras activation .
However , studies of mouse cells lacking three SFKs ( Src , Yes , and Fyn ) indicate that SFKs are mostly dispensable for RTK signaling [ ] .
Thus , the interplay between SFKs and RTKs is complex , and whether endogenous Src plays a direct role in Raf activation remains unclear .
In addition to the N region , T491 and S494 in the activation segment of the kinase domain are also phosphorylated in a Ras dependent manner [ ] .
Recent studies of B-Raf suggest that phosphorylation on these activation loop residues may be important for catalytic activity and and or stabilization of the active conformation of the kinase [ ] .
However , the kinases responsible for their phosphorylation remain elusive .
Interestingly , in B-Raf , the equivalent of S338 is constitutively phosphorylated and the equivalent of Y340 and 341 are occupied by aspartic acids ; consequently , B-Raf exhibits higher basal activity and was shown not to be regulated by Src [ ] .
Similar to B-Raf , Draf also contains two acidic residues ( glutamates ) at positions equivalent to Y340 and 341 of C-Raf , and the equivalent to S338 in C-Raf is also constitutively phosphorylated [ ] ( ) .
Thus , it has been unclear how B-Raf or Draf are regulated in vivo .
In an effort to identify potential activators of Draf , we have previously conducted a genetic screen for genes involved in Draf signaling , taking advantage of a Draf hypomorphic allele , Draf Su2 , which causes partial lethality to flies [ ] .
Draf Su2 encodes a Draf variant with two point mutations that abolish its Ras binding ability , making it more sensitive to reductions in Ras independent Draf activators .
This genetic screen identified Src64B as a potential Draf activator , as reducing the gene dosage of Src64B dominantly enhanced the lethality associated with Draf Su2 flies [ ] .
To determine the role of Src64B in Draf activation in vivo , we genetically and biochemically investigated the function of Src64B in Draf activation .
Here , we show that Src64B behaves as a direct Draf activator in vivo .
An activated form of Src64B induces Draf target genes in the absence of RTK or Ras in vivo , and associates with and phosphorylates Draf .
Moreover , we identified a novel tyrosine ( Y510 ) within the Draf kinase domain that mediates Draf phosphorylation by Src64B in vitro .
Interestingly , the role of Y510 appears to be purely regulatory , as mutating it to phenylalanine or glutamate had no significant impact on the enzymatic activity of a Draf kinase domain fragment .
However , mutating Y510 to glutamate resulted in activation of full-length Draf and reduced affinity between N- and C-terminal Draf fragments .
These results suggest that Y510 phosphorylation plays an essential role in Draf activation by interfering with the association of the C-terminal kinase domain with the inhibitory N-terminal regulatory region .
Results
Src64B Can Function Downstream or in Parallel to Ras1
To investigate whether Src64B plays a direct role in Draf activation , we first tested whether it can induce Draf activation in the absence of Ras1 .
We examined the effects of expressing an activated form of Src64B ( referred to as Src64B act ; a.k.a. Src64B Delta540 ) [ ] on activities of the Torso-Ras1-Draf signaling pathway using the Torso target gene tailless ( tll ) as a readout .
Src64B act ( or Src64B Delta540 ) is truncated from amino acid ( a.a. ) 540 and lacks the C-terminal autoinhibitory domain [ ] .
The posterior expression domain of tll in the early embryo reflects quantitatively the strength of Torso or Draf activation [ , - ] .
tll is expressed from 0 % to 15 % of egg length ( EL ) from the posterior in wild-type embryos and is absent or little detected in embryos lacking Torso , Draf , or Ras1 ( A ; also see Hou et al. , 1995 [ ] ; Li et al. , 1997 [ ] ; see for mutant embryo production ) .
We have previously shown that heat-shock induction of Src64B act can induce ectopic tll expression in wild-type embryos [ ] .
If Src64B plays a role in activating Draf , we expect that Src64B act would induce tll expression in the absence of Torso or Ras1 , but not Draf .
Indeed , we found that a brief induction of Src64B act expression in the early embryos was capable of inducing expression of tll in embryos lacking Torso or Ras1 , but not in those lacking Draf ( A ) .
Consistent with its effects on tll expression , expression of Src64B act was able to rescue to a certain extent the cuticular defects associated with torso or Ras1 , but not Draf mutant embryos ( A ) .
It has been shown that activated Src can induce the formation of a complex between Shc and Grb2 , an event upstream of Ras in the activation of this signaling pathway [ ] , and that the effects of Src64B act on eye differentiation are sensitive to the dosage of Ras1 [ ] .
However , our results indicate that Src64B is able to function downstream or in parallel to Ras1 but upstream of Draf , suggesting it might be able to directly activate Draf .
Figure 1
Src64B Can Function Downstream or in Parallel to Ras in Activating Draf
( A ) Expression of tll mRNA ( blue stains ) in stage 4 embryos ( left column ) was detected by in situ hybridization .
The right panels show cuticles of mature embryos .
All the embryos are shown with anterior to the left .
Genotypes are noted to the right .
Draf indicates Draf 11-29 ; Ras1 , Ras1 DeltaC40B ; and torso , torso XR1 .
( i ) tll is expressed in anterior and posterior regions of wild-type ( WT ) embryos .
The posterior tll expression is solely dependent on the Torso pathway ; the anterior tll expression is repressed by Torso signaling and serves as an internal control .
( i ' ) Wild-type cuticles exhibit eight ventral denticle belts ( numbered 1-8 ) as well as head and tail ( terminal ) structures .
The posterior terminal structures include the eighth ventral denticle belt and the Filzkorper ( arrow ) , which require appropriate posterior tll expression .
Embryos maternally null for torso ( ii and ii ' ) , Ras1 ( iv and iv ' ) , or Draf ( vi and vi ' ) are missing posterior tll expression , and as a consequence , are missing posterior structures and exhibit only seven ventral denticle belts .
Transient expression of Src64B act during early embryogenesis restored the posterior tll expression and the eighth denticle band in torso ( iii and iii ' ) or Ras1 ( v and v ' ) mutant embryos , but not in Draf mutants ( vii and vii ' ) .
More than 200 embryos were observed for each genotype .
Representative pictures are shown .
( B ) The activity of the Ras-binding-deficient Draf Su2 variant is dependent on Src64B .
Cell-free extracts from embryos of indicated genotypes were subjected to in vitro kinase assay using purified GST-Dsor1 ( MEK homolog ) as substrate .
Note Draf Su2 activity is dramatically decreased in Src64B Delta17 background ( cf. lanes 3 and 4 ) .
Wild-type Draf activity is only mildly decreased in Src64B Delta17 background ( cf. lanes 1 and 2 ) .
Depletion of Draf by specific antibody abolished the Dsor1 phosphorylation ( lane 5 ) .
( C ) Draf was immunoprecipitated from embryos of indicated genotypes .
Draf -/ - embryos were maternally null for Draf ( negative control ) .
The immunoprecipitates were subjected to kinase assay using GST-Dsor as substrate with or without added Src64B act .
Note the kinase activity of Draf from Src64B Delta17 was undetectable ( lane 2 ) .
Addition of Src64B act increased the activity of Draf from both Src64B Delta17 and wild-type embryos to similar levels ( lanes 4 and 5 ) .
Src64B Is Required for Draf Kinase Activity
To test whether endogenous Src64B is required for Draf activation in vivo , we sought to analyze the phenotypes of existing mutant alleles of Src64B .
Src64B Delta17 and Src64B PI are the strongest mutant alleles isolated to date , although both are hypomorphs [ ] .
Homozygous mutant animals for these alleles exhibit defects in oogenesis [ ] .
We focused on Src64B Delta17 , which is associated with a deletion that removes the first two noncoding exons of Src64B [ ] .
Other than the oogenesis defects , which result in partial female sterility , Src64B Delta17 homozygotes are morphologically normal and exhibit no discernable developmental or behavioral defects ( unpublished data ; also see [ ] ) , and all aspects of RTK signaling examined appear normal ( see below ) .
This suggests that the residual activity in the mutant suffices for development , or that Src64B is functionally redundant .
The role of Ras in Raf activation is mainly attributed to Ras binding to the inhibitory N-terminus of Raf and targeting Raf to the membrane .
Since the Draf allele , Draf Su2 , harbors point mutations that abolish its interaction with Ras [ ] , it is thus an ideal tool to test whether Src64B is required to directly activate Draf in vivo .
To determine whether the activation of Draf , especially the activation of Draf Su2 , is impaired in Src64B mutants , we measured Draf kinase activity in protein extracts from different mutant combinations .
Using protein extracts and in vitro kinase assays with the downstream suppressor of Raf 1 ( Dsor1 ; a MEK homolog ) as substrate , we found that extracts from Src64B Delta17 homozygotes exhibited reduced levels of Draf activity ( B , lane 2 ) , and the reduction in Draf kinase activity was even more pronounced in extracts from Draf Su2 ; Src64B Delta17 double homozygotes ( B , lane 4 ) .
The Draf activity detected in fly embryo extracts in vitro was indeed dependent on the presence of Draf , as depletion of Draf from the protein extracts prior to kinase assay by an anti-Draf antibody abolished Dsor1 phosphorylation ( B , lane 5 ) .
Thus , even though Src64B hypomorphic mutants are morphologically normal , their Draf activity is severely compromised .
We next determined whether addition of Src64B act could restore the activity of Draf immunoprecipitated from Src64B Delta17 mutant embryos .
Draf immunoprecipitated from Src64B Delta17 and wild-type fly embryos had undetectable and low kinase activities , respectively ( C , lanes 2 , and 3 ) .
However , addition of bacterially purified Src64B act ( see for activity ) significantly increased the kinase activities of immunoprecipitated Draf proteins from Src64B Delta17 and wild-type embryos to comparable levels ( C , lanes 4 and 5 ) .
Src64B act did not directly cause Dsor1 phosphorylation ( C , lane 1 ) .
A kinase-dead version of Src64B act had no effect on immunoprecipitated Draf ( unpublished data ) .
These results suggest that the deficit in Draf kinase activity exhibited by Src64B Delta17 flies might be due to reduced phosphorylation by Src64B .
Finally , consistent with the idea that Src64B activation increases Draf activity in vivo , we found that expressing Src64B act rescued the lethality associated with Draf C110 hemizygous males ( ) .
Draf C110 is a hypomorphic allele , and Draf C110 hemizygous males die as late pupae [ ] .
In summary , the above independent pieces of evidence suggest that Src64B is required for Draf activation in vivo , that activated Src64B can mediate Draf activation independent of Ras1 , and that Src64B might directly activate Draf by phosphorylation .
Src64B Binds to and Phosphorylates Draf on Y510
To investigate the mechanism of Src64B mediated Draf activation , we first determined whether Src64B binds to or phosphorylates Draf .
By transfection and coimmunoprecipitation experiments , we found that Src64B act is indeed able to bind to Draf , mainly to the N-terminal half , and very weakly to the C-terminus ( A ) .
Moreover , we found that when expressed in Drosophila S2 cells , both Src64B act and its kinase-dead version Src64B KR were able to bind to endogenous Draf , as the endogenous Draf was coimmunoprecipitated with transfected Src64B molecules ( B ) .
However , tyrosine phosphorylation was detected only in Draf coimmunoprecipitated with Src64B act , suggesting that Src64B act can directly phosphorylate Draf ( B ) .
Indeed , using bacterially expressed proteins and in vitro kinase assays , we found that GST-Src64B act phosphorylated a C-terminal Draf fragment , Draf-C , consisting of the kinase domain ( see below ) .
It has previously been reported that Fyn and Src binds to and phosphorylates C-Raf on tyrosine residues [ ] .
Interestingly , unlike other Src substrates that bind to Src through SH2-phosphotyrosine interaction , binding to C-Raf by the SH2 domain of Src does not require phosphotyrosine residues on C-Raf [ ] .
Our results are consistent with this finding and suggest that Src64B associates with Draf N-terminal region in a phosphotyrosine independent manner and that Src64B can phosphorylate Draf .
Figure 2
Src64B Binds to Draf and Phosphorylates Draf on Y510
( A ) Src64B binds to Draf mainly through the N-terminal region .
Src64B act was cotransfected with full-length Draf ( FL ) , Draf-N ( N ) , or Draf-C ( C ) into S2 cells .
Transfected Draf was immunoprecipitated ( IP ) with anti-V5 and blotted ( IB ) with anti-Src64B .
Note Src64B act was coimmunoprecipitated with Draf or Draf-N , but very little with Draf-C .
( B ) Src64B binding leads to tyrosine phosphorylation of Draf .
S2 cells were transfected with V5 tagged Src64B act ( referred to as CA , constitutive active ) or a kinase-dead version ( Src64B KR ; KR ) , immunoprecipitated with anti-V5 ( left ) or anti-pTyr ( right ) , and subjected to SDS-PAGE .
Immunoprecipitated Draf from untransfected S2 cells was used as input to mark the position of Draf ( left panels , lane 1 ) .
Note that the endogenous Draf was co-immunoprecipitated with transfected Src proteins ( left panels ; lanes 2 and 3 ) .
Transfection of Src64B act ( CA ) , but not Src64B KR , led to tyrosine phosphorylation of coimmunoprecipitated Draf ( middle left ) .
Also note that the endogenous Draf was immunoprecipitated by anti-pTyr only when S2 cells were transfected with Src64B act , but not Src64B KR ( right panels ) .
( C ) Conservation of Y510 and Y538 in protein kinases .
A multisequence alignment of several kinases identifies two conserved tyrosine residues in the kinase domain , which correspond to Y510 and Y538 of Draf ( red ) .
Y510 is conserved in all Raf family members as well as in Ksr , whereas Y538 is conserved in all kinases analyzed , including tyrosine kinases such as EGFR and Src64B .
The positions of Y510 and Y538 are also indicated in the schematic representation of Draf .
( D-F ) Src64B phosphorylates Draf-C on Y510 .
( D ) Src64B phosphorylates Draf-C on Y510 in vitro .
GST-Src64B act , His-Draf-C WT , His-Draf-C Y510F , and His-Draf-C Y538F proteins purified from E. coli were subjected to in vitro kinase assay .
The levels of tyrosine phosphorylation on different Draf-C molecules were detected by an anti-pTyr antibody .
Increased tyrosine phosphorylation levels in the presence of GST-Src64B act were detected for His-Draf-C WT ( lane 4 ) and His-Draf-C Y538F ( lane 6 ) , but not for His-Draf-C Y510F ( lane 5 ) .
WT , wild type .
( E ) In vitro kinase assay was carried out as in ( D ) , and the proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and blotted with an antibody specific for phospho-Y510 of Draf ( pY510 ) .
Note that anti-pY510 recognized Draf-C WT ( lane 4 ) , but not Draf-C Y510F ( lane 2 ) , following incubation with GST-Src64B act .
( F ) Transfection of V5-Src64B act ( red ; anti-V5 ) into S2 cells resulted in increased Y510 phosphorylation of endogenous Draf ( green ; anti-pY510 ) .
Dotted lines circle two adjacent untransfected cells .
( G ) Y510 phosphorylation correlates with Draf activation in S2 cells .
Five minutes following insulin addition , V5 tagged Draf proteins were immunoprecipitated and then subjected to western blots with anti-pTyr .
Note that tyrosine phosphorylation was detected in Draf WT ( lane 3 ) , but not Draf Y510F ( lane 2 ) .
We next searched for candidate tyrosine residues in Draf that can be phosphorylated by Src64B act .
Sequence comparison revealed two tyrosine residues within the kinase domain ( Y510 and Y538 ) that are conserved among all Raf proteins ( C ) .
We mutated these tyrosine residues to phenylalanine , a non phosphorylatable neutral substitution for tyrosine , and tested whether any of the mutations would affect Draf phosphorylation by Src64B .
By comparing tyrosine phosphorylation levels of Draf-C WT with those of Draf-C Y510F and Draf-C Y538F in the presence or absence of GST-Src64B act , we found that the Y510F substitution greatly diminished phosphorylation by GST-Src64B act , whereas Y538F had little effect ( D ) .
Since Src64B binds to Draf mainly through the N-terminal region ( A ) and Src can bind to Raf independent of phosphotyrosine residues ( B ) [ ] , Y510 of Draf-C is unlikely responsible for binding with Src64B .
Thus , a plausible explanation for the above results is that Y510 is the major Src64B phosphorylation site on Draf .
We confirmed that Src64B phosphorylates Draf on Y510 by producing polyclonal antibodies specific for phospho-Y510 of Draf ( anti-pY510 ; see and ) .
Indeed , the anti-pY510 antibody recognized phosphorylated Draf WT , but not Draf Y510F , following incubation with Src64B act ( E ) .
Consistent with the in vitro kinase assay data , pY510 levels were increased in Src64B act -transfected S2 cells ( F ) , suggesting Src64B can phosphorylate endogenous Draf on Y510 in vivo .
To investigate whether phosphorylation of Y510 in Draf correlates with Draf activation in vivo , we examined the phosphorylation status of Draf immediately following its activation in S2 cells .
It has previously been shown that S2 cells respond to insulin stimulation by activating Draf [ ] .
Immediately following insulin stimulation , we detected tyrosine phosphorylation , albeit low , in transfected Draf WT , but not Draf Y510F ( G ) .
It has previously been shown for C-Raf that activated Raf , which resides in the membrane and is tyrosine phosphorylated , constitutes only a minority of total Raf proteins .
This may explain the difficulty to detect tyrosine phosphorylation of Raf proteins .
Taken together , these results suggest that Y510 becomes phosphorylated upon Draf activation .
Substituting Tyr510 with Glutamate Activates Full-Length Draf In Vitro
To explore whether Y510 is important for Draf activation , we measured the kinase activity of purified Draf proteins with different amino acid substitutions at Y510 .
An acidic substitution can mimic the effects of tyrosine phosphorylation by its negative charge [ , , - ] .
We found that full-length Draf proteins with different Y510 substitutions exhibited different kinase activities when purified from bacteria .
Whereas Draf Y510F and Draf WT exhibited no and barely detectable kinase activities , respectively , Draf Y510E , however , exhibited dramatically higher kinase activities ( A and B ) .
Similar results were found when full-length Draf WT , Draf Y510F , and Draf Y510E proteins were expressed in and immunoprecipitated from S2 cells ( C ) .
Thus , acidic substitution of Y510 results in activation of full-length Draf .
Figure 3
Acidic Substitution of Y510 Promotes and Phenylalanine Substitution Impairs Activation of Full-Length Draf In Vitro and In Vivo
( A ) Draf Y510E ( lane 4 ) exhibited dramatically higher activities by in vitro kinase assay using bacterially expressed full-length Draf variants and GST-Dsor1 .
Dsor1 phosphorylation was detected by anti-pMEK .
WT , wild type .
( B ) Quantification of results represented in ( A ) .
( C ) V5 tagged full-length Draf variants were transfected into S2 cells and were immunoprecipitated with anti-V5 and subjected to kinase assay using bacterially expressed Dsor1 as substrate .
Note that only Draf Y510E exhibited prominent kinase activity toward purified Dsor1 , as detected by anti-pMEK ( lane 4 ) .
( D ) V5 tagged full-length Draf WT or Draf Y510E were transfected into S2 cells and were immunoprecipitated with anti-V5 and then subjected to kinase assay using bacterially expressed Dsor1 as substrate with or without purified GST-Src64B act .
Note that GST-Src64B act stimulated the activity of Draf WT to that of Draf Y510E ( cf. lanes 3 and 4 ) .
( E-H ) Effects of Y510 substitutions on Draf activity in vivo .
( E and F ) Injection of mRNA into early stage embryos .
( i ) Cuticles of a wild-type embryo exhibiting normal head skeleton ( arrow ) , eight ventral denticle belts ( numbered ) , and the Filzkorper ( arrowhead ) .
( ii ) Cuticles from a buffer injected ( control ) Draf -/ - embryo exhibit characteristic Draf null phenotypes : collapsed head skeletons ( arrow ) and loss of all posterior structures ( eighth denticle belt and the Filzkorper ) .
( iii ) A Draf null embryo rescued by injecting Draf Y510E mRNA .
Note the restored eighth denticle belt and the Filzkorper ( arrowhead ) .
Due to the limited diffusion of injected mRNA or different threshold requirement , the anterior ( head skeleton ; arrow ) defects were not rescued , which serves as an internal control .
The phenotypes of rescued torso null embryos are identical to Draf null embryos ( unpublished data ) .
( F ) Draf Y510E expressed from injected mRNA exhibited higher basal and inducible activity than Draf WT ( p < 0.001 ) in vivo .
Draf Y510F had impaired inducible activity ( p < 0.001 ) .
Basal Draf activity was measured by the percentage of rescue of posterior structures of torso null embryos by mRNA microinjection ( shown in blue ) .
Draf Y510E rescued 9.5 % of injected torso embryos , whereas no rescue was found for Draf Y510F and Draf WT .
Inducible Draf activity was measured by the percentage of rescue of posterior structures of Draf null embryos by mRNA microinjection ( shown in red ) .
Draf WT , Draf Y510F , or Draf Y510E rescued 52 % , 9.2 % , or 81 % of Draf null embryos , respectively .
The number of injected embryos scored is indicated .
Chi-square tests were used to compare the differences , p-values are indicated .
( G and H ) In vivo activities of Draf transgenes with different Y510 substitutions .
( G ) Virgin Draf C110 / FM7 females were mated with males with a recombinant chromosome carrying hsp70-Gal4 and an indicated UAS-Draf transgene .
Surviving F1 Draf C110 / Y males were scored and normalized as percent viability relative to control crosses .
Note that Draf C110 / Y males were not viable in the absence of UAS-Draf transgenes , but were rescued to different degrees by different Draf transgenes .
( H ) Females of Nanos-Gal4 ; torso XR1 ; UAS-Draf variants were mated to wild-type males , and the F1 progeny were examined for viability and cuticle patterns .
Note that expressing Draf WT or Draf Y510F did not rescue torso XR1 phenotypes , whereas expressing Draf Y510E fully rescued torso XR1 female sterility ( unpublished data ) or restored the posterior cuticle structures .
To confirm that Y510E mimics Src64B phosphorylation , we subjected Draf WT and Draf Y510E immunoprecipitated from S2 cells to added Src64B act .
We found that Src64B act greatly stimulated the kinase activity of Draf WT but hardly affected that of Draf Y510E ( D ) .
Draf Y510E Behaves as an Activated and Draf Y510F as a Dominant Negative Kinase In Vivo
To investigate the activities of Draf with different Y510 substitutions in vivo in a developmental context , we expressed these molecules in early Drosophila embryos by mRNA injection .
mRNA injection into early embryos has been used as a robust assay for functions of expressed proteins , including Draf .
Based on the ability of injected Draf mRNA to rescue the mutant phenotypes of Draf or torso null embryos ( see for mutant embryo production ) , the basal and inducible activities of different Draf proteins expressed can be quantitatively assessed .
Wild-type Drosophila embryos develop distinct cuticle patterns with eight abdominal ventral denticle bands and a prominent " tail " ( Filzkorper ; E i , arrowhead ) .
The posterior structures ( A8 and Filzkorper ) are specified by the Torso RTK signal transduction pathway , mediated by the Ras1 and Draf signaling cassette [ ] , and torso or Draf null embryos fail to develop these posterior structures ( E ii ) .
We injected mRNA encoding each version of full-length Draf into torso embryos , in which the endogenous Draf remains inactive , and found that Draf Y510E restored the posterior structures in 9.5 % of injected torso embryos , whereas no rescue was found for Draf Y510F and Draf WT ( E iii and 3F ) .
This suggests that Draf Y510E has higher basal activity ( p < 0.001 ) , which is consistent with the in vitro kinase assay data .
When injected into Draf embryos , which are devoid of the endogenous Draf , Draf Y510E exhibited the highest rescuing activity , followed by Draf WT and Draf Y510F ( F ) .
These results demonstrate that acidic substitution of Y510 results in Draf activation in vivo and a conserved substitution to a non phosphorylatable residue renders Draf recalcitrant to activation .
To further confirm the mRNA injection results above , we generated transgenic flies carrying the three versions of full-length Draf transgenes under the control of the Gal4 inducible promoter ( UAS ; [ ] ) .
First , we tested the ability of each Draf transgene to rescue the lethality of flies hemizygous for the hypomorphic allele Draf C110 [ ] .
We found that , when expressed at low levels by the basal activity of hsp70-Gal4 , Draf Y510E and Draf WT rescued 99 % and 80 % , respectively , of the Draf C110 hemizygotes , whereas Draf Y510F had very low ability to do so ( G ) .
Upon heat-shock induction , Draf Y510E , but not Draf WT , caused lethality ( unpublished data ) .
Second , we used a maternal Gal4 driver ( see ) to express the Draf transgenes in a torso null background and examined the cuticle structures of the resulting embryos .
We found that expressing Draf WT had no effect on torso -/ - embryos ( H i ) , and expressing Draf Y510F worsened the torso -/ - phenotypes ( H ii ) , suggesting that Draf Y510F may have dominant negative effects .
In contrast , expressing Draf Y510E had dramatic effects , resulting in rescuing torso -/ - embryos even to full viability , such that 68 % of these embryos ( n = 86 and 127 ) hatched to crawling larvae that subsequently developed to morphologically normal adults ( unpublished data ) .
Although the rest of the embryos failed to hatch , they exhibited wild-type posterior structures , with normal appearing A8 and the Filzkorper ( H iii , arrowhead ) .
Finally , we expressed these Draf transgenes in the developing eye and found that indeed Draf Y510E behaved like an activated and Draf Y510F a dominant negative form of Draf ( see below ) .
These results strongly suggest that Draf Y510E possesses elevated levels of kinase activity that are sufficient to overcome the lack of an upstream receptor Torso .
Y510 Phosphorylation Interferes with Draf Autoinhibitory Interaction
We next explored the molecular mechanisms for the involvement of Y510 phosphorylation in Draf activation .
We first tested whether Y510 modification is important for the enzymatic activity of the Draf kinase by mutating Y510 in Draf-C , consisting of the kinase domain only .
Surprisingly , in contrast to the full-length Draf ( see A and C ) , different Draf-C variants immunoprecipitated from S2 cells exhibited comparable in vitro kinase activities and kinetics , and the levels were similar to the activity of full-length Draf Y510E ( A ) .
Similar results were found for the Draf-C variants purified from bacteria ( ) .
These results indicate that Y510 is not directly involved in the enzymatic reaction of the kinase or its substrate recognition .
Figure 4
Y510E Substitution Interferes with Draf Autoinhibitory Interaction
( A ) V5 tagged Draf-C KD ( K497M ; kinase-dead ) , Draf-C WT , Draf-C Y510F , Draf-C Y510E , and the full-length Draf Y510E ( FL ) were transfected into S2 cells and immunoprecipitated by anti-V5 .
The immunoprecipitates were subjected to kinase assay using bacterially expressed Dsor1 as substrate for 0 , 5 , or 30 min , respectively .
The kinase activity was measured by anti-pMEK signals and plotted at the bottom .
Note that all Draf-C variants and the full-length Draf Y510E exhibited similar kinetics and activities .
WT , wild type .
( B ) V5 tagged Draf-C WT , Draf-C Y510F , or Draf-C Y510E was cotransfected with or without HA-Draf-N ( HA ) into S2 cells , and the cells were subjected to immunoprecipitation ( IP ) by anti-HA and then SDS-PAGE .
Quantifications of three independent western blots ( IB ) are shown in the bottom .
Intensity of gel bands of anti-V5 ( first row ) versus anti-HA ( second row ) are shown for each Draf-C .
Note that compared with Draf-C WT ( lane 3 ) , much less Draf-C Y510E ( lane 4 ) was coimmunoprecipitated with Draf-N .
Y510 and Y538 of Draf are equivalent to Y537 and Y565 of human B-Raf , respectively .
Based on the crystal structure of B-Raf [ ] , Y565 is partially buried into the kinase domain ( ) , which may explain why Src64B can not phosphorylate Y538 in Draf .
As a conserved amino acid , Y538 may be important for the structure of Draf .
Indeed , we found that the Y538F mutation completely abolished the kinase activity of Draf-C in S2 cells ( ) .
In contrast , Y537 is exposed on the surface of B-Raf kinase domain ( ) , and mutating its equivalent in Draf had no effect on the kinase activity of Draf-C ( A and ) .
These results are consistent with the idea that Y510 of Draf is accessible to modification , plays a regulatory role , and yet may not be critical for maintaining the structure of the kinase domain .
Since the full-length Draf differs from Draf-C by the presence of the inhibitory N-terminal regulatory region , the different kinase activities exhibited by full-length and Draf-C proteins with the same Y510 substitutions ( cf. A-C and A ) suggest that Y510 may normally mediate the inhibitory association between the N-terminal regulatory domain and C-terminal kinase domain of Draf , and that mutating Y510 to a charged residue may disrupt Draf N- C fragment interaction , resulting in an open configuration and exposed kinase domain .
To test this idea , we investigated the ability of Draf-N to bind to different versions of Draf-C by coimmunoprecipitation .
It has been shown that overexpressing C-Raf N-terminal fragment inhibits separately expressed C-Raf activity by physical interaction with its C-terminal kinase domain [ ] .
Consistent with this report , we found that separately expressed Draf-N was indeed able to bind to Draf-C ( B ; lane 3 ) .
As predicted , this interaction is impaired by the Y510E mutation ( B ; lane 4 ) , suggesting that the full-length Draf Y510E has reduced self-inhibition and higher basal activity as observed .
Thus , phosphorylation of Y510 by Src64B may play an important regulatory role in Draf activation by relieving the autoinhibition of full-length Draf imposed by its own N-terminal regulatory domains .
Src64B Is Required for Signaling by Multiple RTKs In Vivo
To test whether endogenous Src64B is generally required for Draf activation in vivo , we analyzed the phenotypes of Src64B mutants in multiple biological processes that require RTK-Draf signaling .
In Drosophila , well characterized RTKs include Torso , epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , and Sevenless [ ] .
We have shown that Src64B Delta17 mutant flies possess reduced Draf kinase activity ( see B ) , which can be attributed to lack of tyrosine phosphorylation of Draf by Src64B ( see C ) .
However , although Draf kinase activity is reduced in Src64B Delta17 mutants , these flies nonetheless do not exhibit any overt phenotypes that can be attributed to lack of Draf activation .
To investigate the importance of Src64B in Draf activation in vivo , we examined the role of Src64B in genetic backgrounds in which Draf signaling is reduced .
As with the genetic screen in which Src64B was identified [ ] , such genetic backgrounds may be more sensitive to a reduction in Src64B activity .
To this end , we generated double-mutant combinations between Src64B Delta17 and mutant alleles of torso , Draf , and Egfr , and examined the phenotypic consequences in a few RTK mediated developmental processes in which the requirement for Draf has been well defined .
Although we were unable to detect any phenotypic defects in the Torso system ( unpublished data ) , we were able to show that Src64B mutation compromised signaling by EGFR and Sevenless ( see below ) .
The different outcomes of these genetic tests possibly reflect a different threshold requirement for Draf activation and and or functional redundancy among Src proteins ( see ) .
During oogenesis , EGFR-Draf signaling is required for specifying the dorsal anterior cell fates in the follicular epithelium of the egg chamber [ ] .
Reductions in EGFR or Draf gene activities cause ventralization of the egg chamber , resulting in fusion or missing of the pair of dorsal appendages of the eggshell as well as a reduction in the expression of the EGFR target gene kekkon ( kek ) ( A and B ) .
Egfr heterozygotes ( Egfr /+ ) do not exhibit any discernable abnormalities and were indistinguishable from wild type in eggshell morphology ( unpublished data ) or kek expression ( B ) .
Src64B Delta17 homozygous females lay fewer and smaller eggs , presumably due to a disruption in the cytoplasmic transfer from the nurse cells to the oocyte during oogenesis .
These eggs , however , showed normal spacing between the pair of dorsal appendages ( unpublished data ; also see [ ] , indicating that EGFR signaling was normal in Src64B Delta17 egg chambers .
In contrast , females heterozygous for Egfr and homozygous for Src64B Delta17 ( Egfr /+ ; Src64B Delta17 ) laid eggs that were ventralized in 100 % of them ( n > 500 ; A ) , suggesting a deficiency in EGFR signaling .
We next examined the expression of the EGFR target gene kek .
In wild-type as well as in Src64B Delta17 homozygous or Egfr heterozygous flies , kek is expressed in a gradient with the highest levels in the dorsal anterior region of the follicle cell layer overlying the oocyte nucleus ( B , left ; unpublished data ) [ ] .
Consistent with the ventralized phenotype of Egfr /+ ; Src64B Delta17 animals , kek expression in the dorsal anterior region of stage 10 egg chamber was undetectable ( B , middle ) .
Conversely , expression of a Src64B act transgene , which encodes a constitutively active form of Src64B [ ] , resulted in expansion of kek expression domain to the ventral region of the follicle layer ( B , right ) .
Thus , Src64B is required for the expression of the EGFR target gene kek and patterning the dorsal appendages of the eggshell .
Figure 5
Src64B Is Required for Multiple RTK Pathways during Development
( A and B ) Src64B is involved in EGFR signaling during oogenesis .
( A ) Wild-type ( WT ) eggs have two dorsal appendages arising from the dorsal anterior of the eggshell .
The space between these two dorsal appendages represents the dorsal-most cells , which are specified by EGFR signaling .
Eggs from Egfr /+ ; Src64B Delta17 females exhibit a single dorsal appendage ( or fusion of two appendages ) due to the lack of the dorsal-most cells ( " ventralized " phenotype ) .
( B ) Expression pattern of the EGFR target gene kek in follicle cells of stage 10 egg chambers were detected by in situ hybridization ( blue stains and indicated by arrow ) .
EGFR independent expression of kek in nurse cells ( diffuse blue stain ) is the internal control for staining .
The oocyte is located to the right and is surrounded by somatic follicle cells .
The nurse cells are located to the left of the egg chamber .
Arrowheads point to the boundary between nurse cells and the oocyte .
( Left ) In the wild-type egg chamber , kek is expressed in a gradient in the follicle cells abutting the dorsal-anterior region of the oocyte ( arrow ) .
( Middle ) The dorsal follicular kek expression in Egfr /+ ; Src64B Delta17 egg chambers is not detectable ( arrow ) .
( Right ) Expression of Src64B act resulted in increased kek expression , such that kek is expressed in expanded domains extending to the ventral region .
Higher magnifications of the region of kek expression in dorsal follicle cells as shown in the bottom .
( C ) Src64B is involved in R7 cell specification during eye differentiation .
( i ) Scanning electron micrograph and a section of the compound eye are shown for wild type and Draf su2 Src64B double homozygotes ( right ) .
Photoreceptor cells were stained dark blue .
Note that the compound eyes of Draf su2 Src64B double homozygous mutants are slightly smaller and rough .
In the wild-type eye ( left ) , each ommatidium contains seven photoreceptors ( R1-R7 ) .
R7 is located in the center , which is specified by the Sev RTK pathway .
In Draf su2 Src64B double mutants ( right ) , some ommatidia are missing R7 cells ( n = 97 and 438 ommatidia ) .
( D ) Effects of expressing Draf variants on eye development .
Top row : eyes of GMR-Gal4 , UAS-Draf transgenes flies .
Note that expressing Draf WT and Draf Y510E led to rough eyes , and expressing Draf Y510F caused much reduced eye size .
Bottom row : eyes of flies carrying GMR-Gal4 , UAS-Draf transgenes and sev-Ras V12 .
Note that sev-Ras V12 and Draf WT mutually suppressed each other , in agreement with the previous finding that overexpressing Draf WT has dominant negative effects [ ] ; Draf Y510E enhanced sev-Ras V12 phenotypes ( eyes blistered ) ; Draf Y510F is epistatic to sev-Ras V12 .
We next investigated whether Src64B also plays a role in mediating signaling from the RTK Sevenless in photoreceptor differentiation during eye development ( C ) .
It has been shown that Sevenless ( Sev ) signaling is required for specifying the R7 photoreceptor cell fate [ ] .
A loss of Sev or a reduction in Ras1 or Draf function results in the loss of R7 , and overactivation of these molecules leads to supernumerary R7 phenotype [ ] .
Src64B Delta17 homozygotes have normal eyes and all the ommatidia in eye sections were of normal morphology and were indistinguishable from those of wild type ( n > 600 ommatidia ; unpublished data ) .
Normal morphology and the presence of R7 were also found in Draf Su2 homozygotes ( unpublished data ; also see [ ] .
However , Draf Su2 ; Src64B Delta17 double homozygotes exhibit slightly smaller and rougher eyes ; their eye sections revealed unequal spacing , and portions of the ommatidia are missing R7 ( C , right ) .
It has previously been shown that expression of Src64B act can induce ectopic R7 photoreceptor formation [ ] and ectopic expression of the Torso target gene tll [ ] , and expression of a dominant negative Src64B results in loss of R7 cells [ ] .
Thus , Src64B is required for Sev RTK signaling .
Moreover , we investigated the effects of expression Draf variants on eye development .
When expressed by the eye specific drive GMR-Gal4 , Draf WT and Draf Y510E caused rough eye phenotypes , whereas Draf Y510F led to a much reduced eye size ( D , top row ) .
To understand these eye phenotypes with regard to Draf activity , we expressed the Draf variants in the background of Ras1 V12 expression .
Ras1 V12 overactivates Draf and causes rough eyes [ ] .
We found that Draf WT partially suppressed , Draf Y510E enhanced , and Draf Y510F was epistatic to the rough eye phenotype due to Ras1 V12 expression ( D , bottom ) .
These results are consistent with the interpretation that Draf WT was slightly and Draf Y510F strongly dominant negative , whereas Draf Y510E had elevated kinase activity .
We further found that expression of Src64B act in the wing imaginal disc causes extra vein formation ( unpublished data ) and activation of Rolled and ERK ( ) .
Taken all together , these results strongly suggest that Src64B functions in multiple developmental processes that require RTK signaling , consistent with a role in Draf activation in vivo .
Discussion
We have investigated the mechanism of Draf activation by both genetic and biochemical means .
We have identified a novel tyrosine residue Y510 within the Draf kinase domain that mediates Draf phosphorylation by Src64B and is important for Draf activation in vivo .
Substitution of Y510 to glutamate results in activation of the full-length Draf , without affecting a truncated Draf-C .
These results suggest that Y510 phosphorylation plays an important regulatory role in Draf activation by relief of autoinhibition .
Since Y510 is conserved among all Raf proteins , this mechanism of Raf activation by Src might be evolutionarily conserved .
The Mechanism of Raf Activation Mediated by Y510 Phosphorylation
In light of our results , we propose the following general model to account for Raf activation by phosphorylation ( ) .
In the inactive state of Raf , Y510 may participate in physical interaction between the N-terminal regulatory domains and the C-terminal kinase domain .
Binding to Ras by the N-terminus will transiently dissociate it from the C-terminus , forming to an " open " conformation and exposing Y510 .
Subsequent phosphorylation of Y510 will prevent a reassociation of the N- and C- termini , stabilizing the " open " conformation of Raf .
This model is supported by results of our mutagenesis studies .
Mutations in Y510 in the context of Raf C-terminus have minimal effects on Raf kinase activity .
In contrast , mutating Y510 to an acidic residue ( glutamate ) in full-length Raf could result in a static electrical hindrance similar to the effects of phosphorylation , thereby preventing the formation of the inactive , " closed " Raf configuration and leading to Raf activation .
Phosphorylation as a means to interfere with interaction between protein domains has been documented for Raf and other proteins [ , , - ] .
Figure 6
A Proposed Model for Regulation of Draf by Src64B
Inactive Raf assumes a folded or " closed " conformation due to association of the N-terminal regulatory domains with the C-terminal kinase domain .
Binding to Ras-GTP transiently dissociates the N-terminus from the C-terminus , forming to an " open " conformation and exposing Y510 .
Subsequent phosphorylation of Y510 by Src prevents the re-association of the N- and C-termini , stabilizing the " open " conformation of Raf , allowing its further modification or association with other proteins .
Src64B Phosphorylates and Activates Draf
It has previously been shown that expressing activated Src in cultured mammalian cells leads to C-Raf activation and a concomitant phosphorylation on Y340 and and or Y341 [ , - ] , and that purified Src can directly phosphorylate Y341 in vitro [ ] .
Y340 and Y341 immediately follow two serine residues ( S338 and S339 ) .
Together , these residues constitute the N-region that appears important for C-Raf regulation .
In Draf , the positions equivalent to Y340 and 341 of C-Raf are occupied by two glutamate residues .
The sequence SSEE in the N-region of Draf is thus more similar to the arrangement in B-Raf , which has SSDD occupying these positions .
Since it has been reported that Src does not activate B-Raf [ ] , the sequence similarity between Draf and B-Raf has raised the issue of whether Draf can be phosphorylated or activated by Drosophila Src at all .
However , results from our genetic and biochemical analyses of Src64B and Draf activation in Drosophila contrast the conclusion concerning B-Raf activation and indicates that Src64B may directly activate Draf by phosphorylating Y510 , a conserved tyrosine residue located in the kinase domain of all Raf proteins .
Since Y510 is conserved in all Raf proteins , but not in other kinases other than Ksr ( whose kinase domain is mostly similar to Raf in sequence ) , we propose that the equivalent of Y510 in Raf kinase domain may serve as a key residue mediating Raf phosphorylation and activation by Src .
Biological Functions of Src64B during Drosophila Development
Genetic studies of Src64B suggest that different biological processes may require different threshold levels of Src64B function .
Mutagenic studies intended to isolate loss-of-function alleles of Src64B have so far resulted in a few weak alleles that do not affect viability [ ] .
However , animals with reduced Src64B function , such as Src64B Delta17 homozygotes , are partially female sterile and are associated with defective ovarian ring canal morphogenesis [ ] .
We detected different degrees of disruption in RTK signaling in Src64B mutant flies only in conditions in which the RTK pathway is compromised , such as in combination with viable Draf mutants or Egfr heterozygotes .
Ovarian ring canal morphogenesis probably requires the highest amount of Src64B and becomes the first process to fail when Src64B function is reduced .
Interestingly , we also observed different threshold requirement for Src64B in different RTK signaling pathways .
Among the best characterized biological processes that require RTK and Draf signaling , the dorsoventral polarity of the egg chamber appears the most sensitive ; we found a 100 % penetrant ventralization phenotype in Egfr /+ ; Src64B Delta17 flies .
Draf Su2 ; Src64B Delta17 double homozygous flies also exhibit a 100 % eggshell ventralization , and Draf Su2 homozygotes alone exhibit a certain degree of eggshell ventralization ( unpublished data ) .
The SEV pathway appears less sensitive to reductions in Src64B and Draf activity , such that approximately 22 % of the Draf Su2 ; Src64B Delta17 double homozygous flies are missing R7 .
The least affected RTK pathway is the Torso pathway , which utilizes the same Ras1 and Draf signaling cassette to specify the embryonic terminal structures [ ] .
However , in none of the above mutant combinations did we detect defects in the Torso pathway ( unpublished data ) .
Thus , genetic studies based on a partial loss-of-function Src64B allele , Src64B Delta17 , suggest a differential threshold requirement for Src64B function in the following biological processes : ring canal formation > egg chamber dorsoventral polarity > R7 specification > embryonic termini formation .
Since Draf Y510F poorly rescued the terminal structure in torso null embryos , tyrosine phosphorylation on Y510 could be conferred by protein kinases other than Src64B .
Possible Redundancy of Drosophila Src Family Tyrosine Kinases
It is possible that Src64B is functionally redundant with other cytosolic tyrosine kinases such as Src42A and Tec29A .
This may explain the subtle phenotypes of Src64B mutant alleles .
Src42A is another Src homolog in the fly genome .
Outside of the Src family , Tec kinases are mostly homologous to Src kinases .
In Drosophila , Tec29A has been identified that functions downstream from Src64B during oogenesis .
Moreover , Tec29A is also a potential Draf activator [ ] .
It is thus an interesting scenario that these three tyrosine kinases may function redundantly in phosphorylating and activating Draf .
However , it has been shown that the kinase activity of Src42A is not crucial for mediating RTK signaling , as overexpression of either a wild-type or kinase-dead form of Src42A equally induces hyperactivation of RTK signaling [ ] .
It has recently been shown that a kinase independent scaffolding function of Src42A regulates Draf by a novel CNK dependent derepression mechanism , and Src64B does not share such a function [ ] .
Thus , Src64B and Src42A may have overlapping as well as distinct functions , and further investigation is required to determine how these tyrosine kinases are involved in Draf signaling .
Materials and Methods
Fly strains and genetics .
The following strong or null alleles were used in this study : torso XR1 [ ] , Ras1 DeltaC40B [ ] , Draf 11-29 [ ] , Draf C110 , Draf Su2 [ ] , Src64B Delta17 , and Src64B PI [ ] .
Egfr f2 , sev-Ras V12 ( on a TM3 balancer chromosome ) , Nanos-Gal4 ( on X ) , GMR-Gal4 ( on the second chromosome ) , and hsp70-Gal4 are from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center .
Transgenic lines carrying hsp70-Src64B act -expressing heat-shock-inducible , activated Src64B and Draf were previously described [ ] .
The dominant female sterile ( DFS ) technique [ ] was used to generate germline clone ( GLC ) embryos that lack the maternal product of Ras1 and Draf .
Embryos lacking the maternal torso product were produced by torso XR1 homozygous females .
Standard techniques were used to produce transgenic flies carrying different UAS-Draf variants in the pUAST vector [ ] .
Plasmids and antibodies .
His tagged Draf and Draf-C ( a.a. 368-739 ) constructs were made by ligating Draf cDNA fragments to pQE vectors ( Qiagen ) .
Mutations of Y510 and Y538 were introduced by PCR and verified by sequencing .
Draf-N ( a.a. 1-367 ) and Draf-C were subcloned into the HA-pUAST and Flag-pUAST vectors .
GST tagged Src64B act was made by ligating a Src64B cDNA fragment encoding a.a. 1-540 to the pGEX-KG vector .
Non tagged Src64B act and full-length Draf variants were cloned into the pUAST vector .
GST tagged Dsor and the kinase-dead Draf ( K497M ) were generous gifts from E. Hafen and L. Ambrosio , respectively .
V5-Draf and V5-Src64B act were made by ligating PCR amplified cDNA fragments to the pMT-V5 vector ( Invitrogen ) .
Antibodies specific for phospho-MEK1 / 2 , MEK1 and 2 , and phosphotyrosine ( pY102 ) were from Cell Signaling Technology and were used at 1:1,000 dilution .
Anti-Draf serum ( gift from D. Morrison ) , anti-Src64B ( gift from J. Cooper ) , mouse anti-V5 ( Invitrogen ) , mouse anti-Flag ( Sigma ) , and rat anti-HA ( Roche ) were used at 1:1,000 .
Rabbit anti-V5 ( QED ) and goat anti-HA ( QED ) were used to immunoprecipitate tagged proteins .
Rabbit polyclonal antibody against phospho-Y510 of Draf ( Y510 ) was produced by immunizing rabbit with the phospho-peptide CEGSSLpYKHVHVS , which represents the amino acid sequence around Draf Y510 ( underlined ) .
Antibody production and affinity purification were carried out by Proteintech Group .
Transgene expression and histochemistry .
To determine the effects of heat-shock expression of Src64B act on embryogenesis and Torso signaling , 0-1-h-old embryos carrying one copy of hsp70-Src64B act were collected and were allowed to continue development for an additional hour at 25 degreesC .
They were then subjected to a brief heat shock at 34 degreesC for 5 min in water bath .
Heat shocked embryos were allowed to develop for 20 min .
at 25 degreesC and then fixed , or allowed to develop for 24 h for cuticle examination .
To examine the effects of Src64B act during oogenesis , females containing one copy of hsp70-Src64B act were heat shocked at 34 degreesC for 10 min in water bath , allowed to recover for 10 min at room temperature , and then dissected to fix the ovary .
Detection of tll and kek mRNA expression by in situ hybridization was carried out as previous reported .
Cell culture and transfection .
Drosophila Schneider L2 ( S2 ) cells were cultured at 25 degreesC in Drosophila Serum-Free Media ( SFM ; Invitrogen ) supplemented with 10 % Fetal Bovine Serum ( FBS ; Invitrogen ) and 0.5 x Antibiotic-Antimycotic ( Invitrogen ) .
Cells were cultured at 2.5 x 10 6 / ml prior to transfection .
Transfection was performed with Cellfectin ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
An actin-Gal4 plasmid was used to induce expression of pUAST transgenes .
To induce expression of genes cloned in pMT-V5 vector , Cu 2 SO 4 ( Sigma ) was added to the medium at the final concentration of 0.5 mM 16 h after transfection , and cells were harvested 24 h after induction .
S2 cells were harvested in the cell lysis buffer ( from Cell Signaling Technology ) .
In vitro Draf kinase assay in cell-free extracts .
A total of 100 mul of embryos ( 0-4 h after egg laying ) of different genotypes were homogenized in 100 mul of 2x kinase buffer ( from Cell Signaling Technology ) .
The lysate was cleared by centrifugation for 10 min at 4 degreesC .
To immunoprecipitate Draf , 2 mul of anti-Draf antibody and 10 mul of Protein A-Sepharose ( Sigma ) were incubated with 100 mul of embryo lysates overnight at 4 degreesC .
To measure Draf kinase activity , 50 mul of cell-free embryo extracts or immunoprecipitates were mixed with 2 mug of GST-Dsor and 200 muM ATP for 40 min at 30 degreesC .
To deplete Draf from the lysate , 1 mul of anti-Draf antibody and 10 mul of Protein A-Sepharose ( Sigma ) were added to 100 mul of lysate and the mixture was incubated for 2 h at 4 degreesC in the presence of 1x protease inhibitor cocktail ( Sigma ) prior to centrifugation .
To assess the effects of Src64B , Draf immunoprecipitates were incubated with 2 mug of GST-Src act for 60 min at 30 degreesC in the presence of 200 muM ATP in 50 mul of kinase buffer .
The reaction mixture was centrifuged , and the Draf immunoprecipitates were washed three times and were then subjected to in vitro Draf kinase assay .
Draf kinase activity was detected as Dsor phosphorylation by anti-pMEK following SDS-PAGE .
Protein production and in vitro kinase assays using purified proteins .
His-Draf and His-Draf-C variants , GST-Src64B act , and GST-Dsor were purified from Escherichia coli BL-21 by standard affinity purification .
To purify His-Draf variants ( the bulk of which was insoluble ) , E. coli cells were grown at 28 degreesC , protein expression was induced by IPTG when cell density reached an optical density ( O.D. ) of 0.8 , and cells were harvested 30 min following induction .
Four liters of clear cell lysate ( containing a low concentration of soluble His-Draf ) was incubated with 2 ml of Ni-NTA agarose overnight at 4 degreesC in the presence of beta-mercaptoethanol .
Soluble His-Draf protein was eluted from Ni-NTA agarose pellet with 8 ml of elution buffer , dialyzed , and further concentrated by using BIOMAX centrifugal filter ( Millipore ) to a 30-mul final volume .
Substrate proteins were dephosphorylated by alkaline phosphatase ( Promega ) prior to kinase assays .
Kinase assays for bacterial proteins were carried out by mixing 1 mug of each of the kinase and substrate into 50 mul of kinase buffer in the presence of 1 mM ATP at 30 degreesC for 6 h ( for Dsor as substrate ) or 15 h ( for Draf as substrate ) .
Expressing Draf proteins in early embryos by mRNA microinjection
mRNA microinjection was performed as previously described [ ] .
Draf mRNA was synthesized using the mMESSAGE mMACHINE T7 Kit ( Ambion ) and was injected from the posterior at 1 mug and mul into syncytial blastoderm-stage embryos of desired genotypes .
The effects of expressed Draf protein on Torso signaling were analyzed with injected torso and Draf germline clone embryos .
Sequence analysis and comparison .
Protein sequence alignment of Raf family members were generated by the ClustalW program ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw/index.html ) .
Supporting Information
Figure S1
Raf Family Proteins and Regulatory Residues
Schematic representations of C-Raf , B-Raf , and Drosophila Draf .
The S338 and Y341 are phosphorylated upon C-Raf activation by Ras-GTP .
S417 in Draf and S445 in B-Raf are constitutively phosphorylated .
Y341 in C-Raf is replaced by acid amino acids in Draf and B-Raf .
( 137 KB JPG )
Click here for additional data file .
Figure S2
Activity of GST-Src64B act Purified from Bacteria
GST-Src64B act was expressed in E. coli by standard IPTG induction .
Crude lysate was subjected to SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue ( left ) or transferred to membrane and blotted with anti-pTyr ( middle ) , or further purified by glutathione beads ( unpublished data ) .
A total of 1 mug of purified GST-Src64B act was mixed with Drosophila embryo extracts for 30 min , and the mixture was subjected to SDS-PAGE and blotted with anti-pTyr ( right ) .
Note the increased tyrosine phosphorylation in E. coli and embryo extracts in the presence of GST-Src64B act .
( 503 KB JPG )
Click here for additional data file .
Figure S3
Expression of Src64B act Promotes Viability of Draf C110 Mutants
Draf C110 contains an R217L mutation that disrupts its binding to Ras , and Draf C110 hemizygous males die at the late pupae stage .
.
When animals were raised at 28 degreesC , one copy of the hsp70-Src64B act transgene rescued 6.45 % of Draf C110 hemizygous males to viable adult flies .
For comparison , one copy of hsp70-Draf-C WT transgene rescued 34.9 % of Draf C110 hemizygous males to viability .
Percent viability is the number of surviving Draf C110 hemizygous males versus the total number of progeny flies scored .
The statistical significance of the differences was analyzed by chi-square tests .
p Values are indicated .
( 277 KB JPG )
Click here for additional data file .
Figure S4
Titers of Anti-pY510 Sera
The Draf phospho-peptide CEGSSLpYKHVHVS surrounding Y510 was used to inject rabbits for antibody production .
Antibody production and affinity purification were carried out by Proteintech Group .
ELISA results were supplied by Proteintech Group .
( 1.92 MB JPG )
Click here for additional data file .
Figure S5
Y510 Is Not Essential for Draf Enzymatic Activity
His tagged Draf-C WT , Draf-C Y510F , and Draf-C Y510E were expressed in E. coli and then purified by Ni beads .
Purified proteins ( 1 mug ) were used to perform in vitro kinase assays using bacterially expressed GST-Dsor as substrate .
The kinase activity was measured by anti-pMEK in western blots .
( 166 KB JPG )
Click here for additional data file .
Figure S6
The Draf Y510 and Y538 Equivalents in B-Raf
( A ) The hydroxyl group of Y537 ( equivalent to Y510 in Draf ) is exposed on the surface of B-Raf kinase domain .
The Protein Data Bank ( PDB ) code of the B-Raf structure is 1UWH [ ] .
( B ) The hydroxyl group of Y565 ( equivalent to Y538 in Draf ) is buried into the B-Raf kinase domain .
( C ) Positions of Y537 and Y565 relative to the P-loop ( in green ) and activation segment ( in yellow ) , two regions known to be important for B-Raf activation , are shown .
( D ) Y537 ( in red ) , P-loop , and the activation segment are adjacent on the 3-D structure of the B-Raf kinase domain .
( 914 KB JPG )
Click here for additional data file .
Figure S7
Y538 Is Required for Draf-C Kinase Activity
Expression of Draf-C WT or Draf-C Y510F , but not Draf-C Y538F , increased the phosphorylation levels of Dsor in S2 cells .
Since Y538 is highly conserved in all protein kinases ( see C ) , it might be important for the structure and and or enzymatic activity of the kinase domain .
( 164 KB JPG )
Click here for additional data file .
Figure S8
Expressing Src64B Increases ERK Activation
ERK activation in third instar imaginal discs was detected by anti-dpERK .
( A ) wild-type pattern of dpERK indicating the positions of future vein cells .
( B ) in a rho vn double mutant background , dpERK expression is much reduced , especially in the ventral region ( arrow in [ A and B ] ; also see [ ] ) .
Heat-shock induction of Src64B Delta540 caused widespread ERK activation , such that the whole wing pouch was positively stained by the anti-dpERK antibody ( C and D ) .
Significantly , the ectopic ERK activation induced by Src64B Delta540 was not affected by the absence of rho and vn , as in rho vn double-mutant wing discs , similar expansion of dpERK domains was found .
( 692 KB JPG )
Click here for additional data file .
Accession Numbers
The FlyBase ( http://flybase.bio.indiana.edu ) accession numbers for the genes mentioned in this paper are as follows : Draf ( FBgn0003079 ) , Ras ( FBgn0003205 ) , Src64B ( FBgn0003501 ) , and Torso ( FBgn0003733 ) .
The GenBank ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank ) accession numbers are as follows : Anopheles gambiae raf homolog ( EAA13186 ) , A-Raf ( TVHUAF ) , B-Raf ( TVHUBF ) , Btk29A ( AAF52631 ) , CG8789 ( AAF49129 ) C-Raf ( TVHUF6 ) , CTR1 ( AAA32779 ) , Draf ( AAF45774 ) , Egfr ( AAM70919 ) , ksr ( AAF52021 ) , LIMK1 ( AAF48176 ) , lin-45 ( AAA28142 ) , PhKgamma ( AAG22343 ) , and Src64B ( AAF47922 ) .
The Protein Data Bank ( http://www.rcsb.org/pdb ) code of the B-Raf structure is 1UWH .
