Association of TRAF2 with the short form of cellular FLICE like inhibitory protein prevents TNFR1 mediated apoptosis
Background
We have previously shown that c-FLIP L is a more potent inhibitor than c-FLIP S of Fas ligand induced apoptosis and that c-FLIP L physically binds to Daxx , an alternative Fas signaling adaptor .
Here we examined whether c-FLIP S effectively inhibits TNFR1 mediated apoptosis and triggers JNK activation through its interaction with TRAF2 .
Results
Some cancer cell lines , such as DU145 , AGS , and PC3 , have higher levels of c-FLIP S than other cell lines , such as SNU-719 and T24 .
The expression of c-FLIP S correlated with the susceptibility to TNFR1 mediated apoptosis .
In contrast to DU145 and PC3 , which are resistant to TNFR1 mediated apoptosis , T24 and SNU719 were sensitive to TNF-alpha treatment .
To address the role of c-FLIP S in TNFR1 mediated apoptosis , we examined the molecular interaction between c-FLIP S and TRAF2 .
As expected , western blot analysis revealed that TRAF2 antibody immunoprecipitated a greater amount of c-FLIP S than c-FLIP L .
Also , we measured the involvement of c-FLIP S in TNF-alpha-induced JNK activation and apoptosis by comparing these in TNF-alpha-resistant and TNF-alpha-sensitive cell lines .
Treatment with TNF-alpha increased the phosphorylated JNK level in SNU719 and T24 cells , whereas DU145 and AGS cells were resistant to TNF-alpha-mediated apoptosis .
Conclusion
We now report that the short form of c-FLIP S is a more efficient inhibitor of TNF-receptor 1 mediated apoptosis signaling than the long form of the protein .
Background
Tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 ( TNFR1 ) exhibits diverse activities inducing apoptosis and activating transcription factor NF-kappaB , which lead to the induction of a number of anti-apoptotic factors .
After the components of the death inducing signaling complex of the related death receptor CD95 ( APO-1 / Fas ) [ ] were identified , it was widely assumed that TNFR1 also recruits both the FADD adaptor and caspase 8 upon binding of its ligand , TNF-alpha , resulting in the subsequent initiation of apoptosis .
However , all attempts to demonstrate a direct physical association of FADD and caspase 8 with TNFR1 have so far been unsuccessful [ ] , whereas the anti-apoptotic components of the signaling complex containing TNF-alpha receptor associated factor 2 ( TRAF2 ) , TNFR1 associated death domain protein ( TRADD ) and c-IAP1 are readily detectable [ ] .
In contrast to our understanding of the FAS and TRAIL receptors , the molecular mechanisms underlying TNFR1 induced cell death remain poorly defined , despite extensive study of the signaling pathways that operate through this receptor .
It is currently believed that the engagement of TNFR1 triggers the recruitment of the DD containing adaptor molecule , TRADD , followed by the DD containing Ser and Thr kinase RIP1 [ ] .
This signaling complex is required for TRAF2 and 5 and c-IAP1 binding , which leads to triggering of the NF-kappaB and JNK signaling pathways [ ] .
TNFR1 binding by its ligand triggers these pathways , and can induce apoptosis by alternately binding the DD containing adaptor FADD ( through TRADD ) , which facilitates caspase 8 recruitment and activation [ ] .
The activation of the TNFR1 death receptor by TNF-alpha leads to the recruitment of TRADD , which serves as a platform for the formation of various signaling complexes involved in different biological processes [ ] .
For instance , TRADD can recruit FADD and promote caspase-8 activation and apoptosis through the extrinsic pathway [ ] .
However , TNF-alpha is not cytotoxic to most cells because TRADD can also recruit TRAF2 and RIP to form distinct complexes leading to the activation of NF-kappaB and JNK [ - ] .
Because activation of NF-kappaB serves as a primary mechanism to protect cells against apoptotic stimuli such as TNF-alpha [ - ] , TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis requires NF-kappaB inhibition .
The involvement of JNK in TNF-alpha-mediated apoptosis is highly controversial [ - ] .
Induction of NF-kappaB has been shown recently to inhibit TNF-alpha-mediated JNK activation .
Moreover , blocking NF-kappaB results in the sustained activation of JNK , which may directly promote TNF-alpha-mediated apoptosis .
However , although sustained activation of JNK promotes cell death , the molecular basis of how this contributes to TNF-alpha-mediated apoptosis remains to be addressed .
One of the well described apoptosis inhibitors is c-FLIP , which is also known as FLAME-1 / I-FLICE/CASPER/CASH / MRIT/CLARP/Usurpin [ ] .
c-FLIP L and c-FLIP S contain two DED domains that are structurally similar to the N-terminal part of procaspase-8 .
The C terminus of c-FLIP L consists of two catalytically inactive caspase like domains ( p20 and p12 ) , whereas the short C terminus of c-FLIP S shows no homology to procaspases-8 or -10 .
Both isoforms of c-FLIP are recruited to the DISC by DED DED interactions [ - ] .
However , it remains to be clarified in detail whether the differences in the mechanism of apoptosis inhibition also reflect different functional roles of c-FLIP S and c-FLIP L and by which downstream mechanisms they are mediated .
Genetic evidence suggests that FADD and caspase 8 are important for TNFR1 mediated apoptosis .
In addition , expression of the inhibitor of caspase 8 , c-FLIP L , inhibits the TNF-alpha-induced apoptotic pathway [ ] , which provides further evidence for the important role of caspase 8 in this cascade .
Expression of c-FLIP L is induced by NF-kappaB [ ] , which may explain why death receptor induced apoptosis is generally blocked in cells with active NF-kappaB .
Here we examined whether c-FLIP S effectively inhibits TNFR1 mediated apoptosis and triggers JNK activation through its interaction with TRAF2 .
The effects of TRAF2 in TNFR1 mediated apoptosis was attenuated by DN-TRAF2 , and the level of p-JNK in c-FLIP S siRNA increased more in TNF-alpha sensitive cell line than in a TNF-alpha resistant cell line .
In this paper , we demonstrate that the regulation of c-FLIP S is related to the TNFR1 signaling pathway .
Results
Inhibition of TNFR1 mediated apoptosis is dependent on the expression levels of c-FLIP S
To examine the relationship between the expression level of c-FLIP S and the apoptotic response , we used real-time PCR to examine the expression of c-FLIP in human cancer cell lines .
We have shown previously that c-FLIP L is a more potent inhibitor than c-FLIP S of Fas ligand induced apoptosis and that c-FLIP L physically binds to Daxx through an interaction between its C-terminal domain and the Fas binding domain of Daxx , an alternative Fas signaling adaptor [ ] .
Interestingly , some cancer cell lines , such as DU145 , AGS , and PC3 , have higher levels of c-FLIP S than other cell lines , such as SNU-719 and T24 .
However , the expression of c-FLIP S at the transcriptional level does not exactly reflect the protein levels .
This discrepancy may result from the low mRNA stability of c-FLIP , which has been described recently .
Figure 1
The expression levels of c-FLIP S indicate a relationship to resistance to TNF induced apoptosis .
( A ) Immunoblotting analysis of c-FLIP L and c-FLIP S in TNF-alpha-resistant and TNF-alpha-sensitive cell lines with anti-FLIP L and anti-FLIP S antibodies .
The molecular weights of c-FLIP L and c-FLIP S were about 55 kDa and 28 kDa , respectively .
beta-Actin was used as a loading control .
( B ) Differences in the expression levels of c-FLIP S between various cancer cell lines shown by quantitative real-time PCR and SYBR Green detection .
Levels of c-FLIP S were normalized to GAPDH and the fold changes in c-FLIP S levels are shown for each cell line .
Data shown are the average of two assays .
PCR products were analyzed using Sequence Detection software .
Error bars equal the SEM .
( C ) Measurement of TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis using the TUNEL assay ( M , TUNEL positive ) in different human cancer cell lines .
Different patterns are shown following treatment with TNF-alpha ( 10 ng and ml ) at 0 , 12 , and 24 h.
To elucidate the biological significance of these phenomena , we examined the susceptibility of these cell lines to TNF-alpha .
Interestingly , the expression of c-FLIP S correlated with the susceptibility to TNFR1 mediated apoptosis .
In contrast to DU145 and PC3 , which are resistant to TNFR1 mediated apoptosis , T24 and SNU719 were sensitive to TNF-alpha treatment .
The sensitivity of cells to TNF is associated with the expression levels of c-FLIP S
Based on our previous findings , we speculated that the overexpression of c-FLIP S would confer resistance to TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis more effectively than overexpression of c-FLIP L .
We investigated the role of c-FLIP S in this pathway by transfecting into SNU-719 cells , which express a lower level of c-FLIP S than other cell lines , because we did not have a knockout cell line of c-FLIP S .
Although the ectopic expression of c-FLIP S and c-FLIP L did not significantly inhibit TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis , the inhibition of TNFR1 induced apoptosis by c-FLIP S was more potent than that of c-FLIP L .
Figure 2
Expression of c-FLIP S confers stronger resistance to TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis than c-FLIP L , through a TRAF2 dependent mechanism .
( A ) Analysis of TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis .
SNU-719 cells were transfected with the indicated constructs and treated with 10 ng and ml TNF-alpha for 24 h. Apoptotic cells were evaluated 48 h after transfection for each construct using the DNA fragmentation assay as described in Materials and methods .
After treatment with TNF-alpha , the percentage of apoptotic cells transfected with pcDNA and c-FLIP L increased , but the percentage of apoptotic cells did not change in cells transfected with c-FLIP S .
This experiment was performed three times independently .
* P < 0.01 compared with FLIP L and FLIP S .
( B ) Ectopic expression of c-FLIP L by itself induced the activation of JNK in response to TNF-alpha , whereas c-FLIP S did not change this effect .
P- and t-JNK indicate the phosphorylated JNK and total JNK levels , respectively .
( C ) SNU-719 cells were transfected with FLAG tagged c-FLIP L and c-FLIP S expression vectors , incubated with TNF-alpha ( 10 ng and ml ) for 12 h , and subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-TRAF2 antibody followed by immunoblotting with anti-FLAG antibody .
Immunoblotting of TRAF2 was used as a loading control .
( D ) To verify the role of TRAF2 in TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis , SNU-719 cells were cotransfected with the indicated constructs with DN-TRAF2 .
Apoptotic cells were evaluated 24 h after transfection for each construct using flow cytometric analysis as described in Materials and methods .
( E ) To confirm the results , we examined caspase 3 activity in the same conditions as described in Fig. 2 .
D. beta-Actin was used as a loading control .
To further examine the role of c-FLIP S in JNK activation , we transfected c-FLIP L and c-FLIP S expression vectors into SNU-719 cells , which constitutively express TNF .
We found other significant differences in the effects of these c-FLIP variants on the TNF-alpha-induced activation of JNK .
In c-FLIP L -transfected cells , TNF induced the phosphorylation of JNK , whereas in c-FLIP S -expressing cells , the phosphorylation of JNK was not changed .
To address the role of c-FLIP S in the activation of JNK , we examined the molecular interaction between c-FLIP S and TRAF2 , a mediator of TNF induced JNK and NF-kappaB activation .
Extracts from cell lines expressing pcDNA , c-FLIP L , and c-FLIP S were immunoprecipitated with TRAF2 or with the corresponding preimmune serum .
As expected , western blot analysis revealed that TRAF2 antibody immunoprecipitated a greater amount of c-FLIP S than c-FLIP L .
To verify whether TRAF2 mediates TNFR1 induced apoptosis , DN-TRAF2 was transiently expressed using the same conditions as shown in Fig .
.
The effects on TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis did not differ between the c-FLIP variants .
To measure the activity of apoptosis , we also examined the level of caspase 3 by immunoblotting after treatment with DN-TRAF2 .
As expected , the level of caspase 3 protein did not differ between the three c-FLIP variants ( procaspase data not shown ) .
These results suggest that each c-FLIP variant is capable of binding to TRAF2 , where it may inhibit TNFR1 mediated apoptosis .
The function of c-FLIP S is exerted through TNFR1 mediated JNK activation
The TNFR1 mediated apoptotic response has two pathways : type 1 apoptosis achieved through FADD-caspase 8 activation , and type 2 mitochondrial dependent apoptosis , which is less dependent on the FADD-caspase 8 pathway [ ] .
TNF-alpha enhances the activity of JNK , which leads to dysfunctional mitochondria and contributes to TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis [ ] .
We examined the involvement of c-FLIP S in TNF-alpha-induced JNK activation and apoptosis by comparing these in TNF-alpha-resistant and TNF-alpha-sensitive cell lines .
Treatment with TNF-alpha increased the phosphorylated JNK level in SNU719 and T24 cells , whereas DU145 and AGS cells were resistant to TNF-alpha-mediated apoptosis .
These results indicate that the sensitivity to TNF-alpha is associated with the TNF induced activation of JNK .
Figure 3
JNK activation in TNF resistant cell lines .
TNF-alpha-sensitive cell lines can activate JNK in response to TNF-alpha .
In T24 and SNU719 cells , JNK is activated in response to TNF-alpha , whereas DU145 and AGS cells do not show this induction .
( A ) To examine the activation of JNK , protein extracts from the indicated cell lines were incubated for 6 h with TNF-alpha ( 10 ng and ml ) and subjected to immunoblotting with phospho specific and total JNK antibodies .
P- and T- indicate phosphorylated proteins and total proteins , respectively .
( B ) Expression was quantified by densitometric scan of the blots ( A ) .
Values are the ratio of p-JNK and t-JNK and are presented relative to each control .
Knockdown of endogenous c-FLIP S augments TNFR1 mediated apoptosis
To confirm the involvement of endogenous c-FLIP S in TNFR1 mediated apoptosis , we developed siRNA oligonucleotides that selectively knock down the expression of c-FLIP S in several cancer cell lines .
To select a potent candidate siRNA oligonucleotide , we transfected human PC3 cells , which express a higher level of c-FLIP S than other cell lines , with siRNAs .
Cells were incubated for 48 h , and the level of c-FLIP S proteins was assessed by immunoblot analysis .
The results confirmed the ability of oligonucleotides C2 and C3 to knock down expression of c-FLIP S .
To verify the effect of c-FLIP S knockdown on JNK activation , we studied several cancer cell lines .
Phosphorylated JNK levels increased in T24 and SNU719 cells , whereas AGS and DU145 cells were resistant to TNF-alpha .
We also examined the susceptibility of these cell lines to TNF-alpha in c-FLIP S siRNA .
The basal level of c-FLIP S was marginal in T24 and SNU719 cells , but DU145 and AGS cell lines expressed some degree of c-FLIP S protein in the control condition .
Relative to the basal level of c-FLIP S , the ratio of apoptosis increased more in DU145 ( 7 fold ) and AGS cells ( 6 fold ) than in T24 cells ( 2.5 fold ) , although these differences were not considerable .
Apoptosis analysis indicated that knockdown of c-FLIP S in SNU719 and T24 cells increased the level of spontaneous cell death by about 40 % compared with control , whereas knockdown of DU145 and AGS had minimal effects .
To confirm this result , we used immunoblot analysis to examine the level of c-FLIP S protein in these cell lines after treatment with siRNA .
As expected , the expression of c-FLIP S decreased in these cell lines with c-FLIP S siRNA .
Figure 4
Knockdown of endogenous c-FLIP S in several cell lines enhances apoptosis induction by TNF-alpha .
( A ) To examine the role of c-FLIP S in TNFR1 mediated apoptosis , PC3 cells were transfected with three different siRNA oligonucleotides designed to knock down c-FLIP S .
The level of c-FLIP S protein was inhibited completely by C2 and C3 .
In further studies , we used C3 oligonucleotide as an siRNA .
( B ) The indicated siRNA transfected cells were treated with TNF-alpha ( 5 ng and ml ) for 24 h and extracted for immunoblotting with phospho specific antibodies to JNK and actin .
( C ) The indicated siRNA transfected cell lines were treated with TNF-alpha ( 5 ng and ml ) for 24 h before harvesting for flow cytometric analysis .
This experiment was performed independently three times .
( D ) The indicated siRNA transfected cell lines were treated with TNF-alpha ( 5 ng and ml ) for 24 h and extracted for immunoblotting with anti-FLIP S antibody .
beta-Actin was used as a loading control .
Discussion
Although a specific role for each c-FLIP and a distinct mechanism by which each inhibits apoptosis have been proposed , the functions of the c-FLIP splice variants remain largely unknown .
Our current data provide insight into the mechanism underlying the TNF-alpha-induced apoptotic pathway .
This pathway is characterized by a higher affinity of TRAF2 for c-FLIP S over c-FLIP L and involves suppression of JNK activation and resistance to TNF-alpha-induced cell death .
c-FLIP S is also readily detectable in various types of human cancer and confers resistance to CD95 mediated apoptosis in T cells during the immune response [ ] .
Our results are summarized in the model shown in Fig .
.
It appears that c-FLIP S and c-FLIP L have distinct roles , and we speculate that c-FLIP S acts primarily to support TNF induced JNK activation .
Our results are consistent with previous data showing different functions of each type of c-FLIP , including a specific role for c-FLIP S in CD40 signaling [ ] .
A distinct action of each c-FLIP variant in Fas induced cleavage of caspase 8 has also been proposed [ ] .
According to these earlier studies , c-FLIP L and c-FLIP S produce different end products in the caspase 8 pathway .
Our data also show that apoptosis sensitivity correlates with c-FLIP expression in several cell types , including dendritic cells , keratinocytes , and vascular smooth muscle cells ( data not shown ) .
Figure 5
A working model of the role of c-FLIP S in TNFR1 mediated apoptosis .
The binding of c-FLIP S to TRAF2 delays the recruitment of c-FLIP L , and c-FLIP S and c-FLIP L block TNFR1 mediated apoptosis .
However , the cellular c-FLIP S level is elevated sufficiently to block apoptosis and promote cell survival .
Although TRAF2 bound both c-FLIP S and c-FLIP L in our experiments , other reports have shown that c-FLIP L interacts exclusively with TRAF2 [ ] .
This discrepancy may be reconciled by recent studies showing that alternative variants of c-FLIP promote different TNF-alpha-induced signaling pathways .
c-FLIP L has a strong affinity for Raf , whereas c-FLIP S is tightly associated with TRAF2 [ ] .
The gene knockout and siRNA knockdown studies of c-FLIP reported to date show that reduction of both c-FLIP variants sensitizes cells to death receptor induced apoptosis [ ] .
We used a selective siRNA knockdown approach to assess the specific function of endogenous c-FLIP S and compare this with the function of c-FLIP L .
Our results reinforce the conclusion that endogenous c-FLIP S inhibits death receptor mediated apoptosis .
Our data showing that c-FLIP S interacts rapidly with FADD and enhances the activation of JNK through TRAF2 may explain why c-FLIP S shows high expression levels , despite its overlapping role with c-FLIP L .
In addition , the expression pattern of c-FLIP S is coupled to the expression of TNF .
Our current experiments have confirmed our previous data showing that each type of c-FLIP has a distinct target in the inhibition of apoptosis .
We postulate that the different expression patterns of the c-FLIP variants are specific to cancer cell type .
Methods
Cell culture and reagents
Human cancer cell lines were obtained from ATCC and maintained in RPMI 1640 containing 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) ( Gibco BRL ) heat inactivated at 37degreesC ; cells were grown in a humidified chamber containing 5 % CO 2 .
Except as indicated , all other chemicals used in this experiment were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich .
Recombinant human TNF-alpha and antibodies were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotech .
Construction of vectors and transfection procedure
Expression constructs for c-FLIP L , c-FLIP S , and a dominant negative version of TRAF2 ( TRAF2 266-501 ) were generated by RT-PCR-based cloning into the pcDNA 3.1 topo His and V5 vector ( Invitrogen . )
Geneporter transfection reagent was purchased from Gene Therapy Systems .
The transfection procedure was performed according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
Briefly , cells were seeded in six-well plates at a concentration of 1 x 10 5 cells and well .
Four micrograms of DNA per well was mixed with serum-free media containing Geneporter ( 10 mul and well ) , incubated for 30 min at room temperature , and added to cells that had previously been washed twice with PBS .
After 3-5 h , media ( 1 ml and well ) containing 20 % FBS was added to each well .
All experiments , including thymidine incorporation assays , western blotting , immunoprecipitation , and cell death assays , were performed after incubation for 24 h. To monitor transfection efficiency , cells were cotransfected with GFP-pcDNA .
siRNA preparation and transfection
Small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) oligonucleotides against c-FLIP S were synthesized by BLOCK-iT ( TM ) RNAi Designer [ ] ( C1 : 5 ' GCCATTTGACCTGCTCAAA3 ' C2 : 5 ' GCAGAGATTGGTGAGGATT3 ' C3 : 5 ' GGAGAAACTAAATCTGGTT3 ' ) .
All siRNA oligonucleotides were resuspended to a concentration of 20 muM .
The cells were seeded for transfection in medium without antibiotics one day before transfection to ensure they were 85 % -95 % confluent on the day of transfection .
For transfection , regular medium was replaced with serum-free medium without antibiotics .
The cells were transfected with siRNA using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) at a ratio of 1:3 siRNA : Lipofectamine ( mug : mul ) , giving a final concentration of 100-150 nM siRNA .
The cells were incubated with the siRNA-Lipofectamine 2000 complex for 4 h , the serum-free medium was replaced with normal medium ( containing 10 % FBS ) without antibiotics , and the cells incubated for a total of 48 h before further analysis .
Real-time PCR
Reactions for real-time PCR were performed in a final volume of 25 mul using TaqMan detection .
Each tube contained 12.5 mul of TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix , 1.25 mul of Assays-on-Demand Gene Expression probes ( Applied Biosystems ) TaqMan probe and 100 ng of each cDNA template .
All PCR samples and controls were prepared in triplicate using 0.2 ml Micro-Amp Optical reaction tubes and MicroAmp Optical tube caps ( Applied Biosystems ) .
The PCR mixture was held at 50degreesC for 5 min and denatured at 95degreesC for 10 min .
Forty amplification cycles were carried out at 95degreesC for 20 s , followed by 60degreesC for 1 min .
All amplifications were performed using an ABI PRISM ( R ) 7900 HT ( Applied Biosystems ) .
PCR products were analyzed using Sequence Detection software ( Applied Biosystems ) .
Cell death assay and flow cytometric detection of apoptosis by annexin V labeling
A DNA fragmentation assay ( BMS ; Manheim , Germany ) was used .
All procedures were performed using the manufacturer 's protocol .
Analysis of ELISA was carried by a Softmax ELISA reader at an absorbance of 460 nm .
Each experiment was performed independently three times by external observers .
Annexin V ( Sigma ) , a phosphatidylserine binding protein , was used to detect apoptotic cells , and the nuclear stain , propidium iodide ( PI ) ( Sigma ) was used to identify late-apoptotic cells or necrotic cells .
Cells seeded at a concentration of 1 x 10 5 cells and well in six-well plates were incubated at 37degreesC with or without 10 ng and ml TNF-alpha for 24 h. Cells were washed twice with cold PBS and resuspended in 500 mul of binding buffer ( 100 muM HEPES , pH 7.4 , 14 mM NaCl , and 25 muM CaCl 2 ) containing 5 mul of annexin V-fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) ( Sigma ) and 10 mug and ml PI for 15 min at 4degreesC in the dark .
For each sample , about 10 5 cells were analyzed by flow cytometry .
FITC and PI emissions were collected through 520 and 630 nm bandpass filters , respectively .
Authors ' contributions
DJK did all of the experiments and writing of the manuscript ,
CP and BSO contributed experiment design and discussion of results .
YYK contributed the project leader and designer of this study and writing of the manuscript .
All authors read and approved the final manuscript .
