The integrin effector PINCH regulates JNK activity and epithelial migration in concert with Ras suppressor 1
Cell adhesion and migration are dynamic processes requiring the coordinated action of multiple signaling pathways , but the mechanisms underlying signal integration have remained elusive .
Drosophila embryonic dorsal closure ( DC ) requires both integrin function and c-Jun amino-terminal kinase ( JNK ) signaling for opposed epithelial sheets to migrate , meet , and suture .
Here , we show that PINCH , a protein required for integrin dependent cell adhesion and actin-membrane anchorage , is present at the leading edge of these migrating epithelia and is required for DC .
By analysis of native protein complexes , we identify RSU-1 , a regulator of Ras signaling in mammalian cells , as a novel PINCH binding partner that contributes to PINCH stability .
Mutation of the gene encoding RSU-1 results in wing blistering in Drosophila , demonstrating its role in integrin dependent cell adhesion .
Genetic interaction analyses reveal that both PINCH and RSU-1 antagonize JNK signaling during DC .
Our results suggest that PINCH and RSU-1 contribute to the integration of JNK and integrin functions during Drosophila development .
Introduction
Adhesion and migration of epithelial sheets are critical for wound healing , organ integrity , and morphogenetic movements during development .
Cellular circuits that orchestrate these processes require coordination of integrin function with multiple signaling pathways .
Integrins are transmembrane heterodimeric receptors for ECM that convey information bi-directionally between the extracellular environment and intracellular signaling machinery ( ) .
Engagement of integrins leads to the concentration of tyrosine kinases and their substrates at focal adhesions , a type of adherens junction that acts as a signaling nexus , a tethering site for actin filaments , and a region for generation of traction force during cell migration .
During Drosophila embryogenesis , lateral epidermal sheets migrate to close a hole in the dorsal epidermis in the process of dorsal closure ( DC ) .
DC is executed through cytoskeletal rearrangements and cell shape changes with no accompanying cell division ( ) .
Because many proteins involved in DC also function in epithelial migration in other organisms , DC has emerged as an ideal model system to dissect the mechanisms driving migration and fusion of epithelial sheets .
During DC , structures related to focal adhesions are assembled at the leading edge ( LE ) of advancing lateral epithelial cells and integrins are concentrated at these sites .
Moreover , genetic analysis has revealed that integrins are essential for normal DC .
Based on the established roles of integrins in mammalian systems , these adhesion receptors could influence DC by supporting cell-substratum interactions , modulating signaling pathways , or both .
One signaling cascade that is essential for successful execution of DC results in activation of c-Jun amino-terminal kinase ( JNK ) .
Fine tuning of JNK output is critical , as both attenuation and hyper-activation of JNK signaling result in a failure of DC .
The formation of focal adhesion complexes at the apical borders of the LE cells during DC depends on proper modulation of the JNK cascade , highlighting the potential importance of crosstalk between integrin and JNK signaling .
Several cytoplasmic proteins that colocalize with integrins are known to be essential mediators of integrin function in mammalian systems ( ) .
One of these , the LIM protein PINCH , interacts with the integrin linked kinase ( ILK ) and is critical for adhesion and spreading of mammalian cells .
To elucidate the in vivo role and mechanism of action of PINCH , we undertook a genetic analysis of PINCH function .
Drosophila PINCH is encoded by the steamer duck ( stck ) locus .
Mosaic analysis has revealed a critical role for PINCH in integrin dependent epithelial cell adhesion in the adult wing ( ) .
Homozygous zygotic stck mutants die late in embryogenesis , exhibiting deficits in both muscle cell adhesion and actin-membrane anchorage ( ) .
Involvement of PINCH in both integrin mediated adhesion and actin-membrane linkages makes it an attractive candidate for coordination of integrin and JNK functions during DC .
Results and discussion
To determine if PINCH could contribute to DC , we examined its localization in stage 14 embryos .
PINCH and beta-PS integrin are colocalized in both the LE and the amnioserosa ( A ) , consistent with PINCH 's established role as an integrin effector .
The amnioserosa is an extraembryonic tissue present on the dorsal surface of the embryo .
As it has been established that coordinated signaling between the amnioserosa and migrating epithelium is key to formation of LE focal complexes ( ) , PINCH could exert an effect in the LE epithelium , the amnioserosa , or both tissues .
stck homozygous mutant embryos rescued with a PINCH : GFP transgene under the control of the endogenous PINCH promoter display PINCH-GFP at the LE of the advancing epithelial sheets .
Within the LE , PINCH is precisely localized to areas of active phosphotyrosine signaling at triangular nodes corresponding to apical adherens junctions ( B , inset ) .
Figure 1 .
PINCH functions in DC and colocalizes with beta-PS integrin and phosphotyrosine .
( A ) Confocal image of w 1118 embryo shows PINCH ( green ) , beta-integrin ( magenta ) , and their merge ( white ) highlighting the LE ( arrow ) and amnioserosa ( asterisk ) .
Inset shows a single z-slice and confirms colocalization .
( B ) Confocal image of P [ w + GFP-PINCH ] stck 18 / l ( 3 ) 097 embryo shows PINCH : GFP ( green ) , phosphotyrosine ( magenta ) , and their merge ( white ) .
Inset : magnification of the LE illustrating concentration of PINCH at apical junctions .
( C ) Cuticles of embryos carrying stck 17 loss-of-function allele both maternally and zygotically display puckers ( left , arrow ) and dorsal holes ( right , arrows ) .
Analogous stck 18 embryos have the same array of phenotypes .
Control FLP-FRT embryos with wild-type PINCH are fully viable .
Bars : 20 mum ( A ) , 100 mum ( B and C ) .
Zygotic stck mutants proceed normally through DC with complete lethality arising at the embryo-to-larval transition .
When maternal PINCH contribution is eliminated , only 12 % of cuticles have wild-type morphology .
Dorsal puckers and dorsal holes ( C ) characteristic of aberrant DC are observed at a 36 and 23 % frequency , respectively ( n = 180 ) , indicating that maternally inherited PINCH is a key contributor to the process of DC .
Moreover , in the absence of maternal PINCH , we also observe epithelial defects in ventral patterning and head involution , indicating that PINCH may have additional functions in the developing embryo .
Cuticles from embryos lacking both maternal and zygotic PINCH have the same array of phenotypes .
PINCH is composed of five LIM domains , each of which could serve as a protein binding interface .
The SH2-SH3 adaptor protein , Nck2 , has been reported to interact with mammalian PINCH ( ) .
This association is intriguing because the Drosophila homologue of Nck2 , Dreadlocks , interacts directly with Misshapen ( Msn ) , a MAP4K in the JNK signaling cascade ( ) .
As with other components of the JNK pathway , null mutations in msn result in embryonic lethality due to failure of DC .
Although we were unable to detect direct binding of PINCH to Dreadlocks in Drosophila , we uncovered a link between PINCH 's role in DC and the JNK cascade by testing for genetic interaction between stck and msn .
Reduction of PINCH protein levels by introduction of a single copy of the loss-of-function allele , stck 18 , into the msn 102 homozygous null background allows partial restoration of DC ( P = 0.003 ; A ) , suggesting that PINCH functions as a negative regulator of JNK signaling .
Figure 2 .
PINCH regulates JNK signaling .
( A ) Representative dorsal open msn 102 ( dorsal view ) and dorsal rescued msn 102 stck 18 / msn 102 ( lateral view ) embryos .
Arrows mark the LE or dorsal suture .
Graph shows percentage of dorsal open embryos observed in the sample size reported above each bar .
( B ) Inverted confocal images of stage 14 ( top ) and stage 15 ( bottom ) puc E69 /+ embryos showing Puc : LacZ expression ( black ) .
Genetic backgrounds are wild type ( left ) or maternally stck deficient ( right ) .
( C ) Confocal image of a puc E69 third instar larval wing disc showing Puc : LacZ ( green ) , PINCH ( magenta ) , and their merge ( white ) .
Arrow indicates the proximal stalk region .
( D ) Comparison of msn 3349 and rescued msn 3349 stck 18 / msn 3349 adult flies showing defective versus normal thorax .
Graph reflects percent eclosure of the indicated genotype calculated from the sample size shown above each bar .
Bars , 100 muM .
Puckered ( Puc ) is a JNK phosphatase whose expression is up regulated in response to JNK activation , setting up a negative feedback loop ( ) .
During DC , JNK regulated expression of a Puc-LacZ fusion reporter is restricted to the LE cells ( B ) .
In embryos lacking maternal PINCH , expression of the Puc-LacZ fusion protein is disorganized and present in an expanded number of cells , including those beyond the LE border ( B ) .
This phenotype is similar to Puc-LacZ expression observed in puc loss-of-function mutants and further supports a role for PINCH in the negative regulation of the JNK cascade .
Thorax closure is a post-embryonic developmental process with features common to DC , including migration of epithelial sheets and a dependence on JNK signaling .
Within the wing disc , cells of the stalk region are functionally similar to LE cells during DC .
These cells comprise the eventual fusion site for adjacent imaginal discs and are active in JNK signaling ( ) .
Spatially restricted JNK signaling in the stalk of wing disc can be visualized via a Puc-LacZ reporter , and PINCH expression overlaps with Puc-LacZ in this area of active JNK signaling ( C ) .
Therefore , as in DC , PINCH is properly positioned to act as a regulator of the JNK cascade .
Although msn null mutations are embryonic lethal due to DC failure , flies homozygous for the hypomorphic allele msn 3349 are semi-viable and a large proportion of the eclosing adults have thorax closure defects ( D ) .
These observations underscore the similarities between thorax closure and DC .
In a stck 18 heterozygous background , a greater percentage of msn 3349 homozygotes are able to eclose ( P < 0.0001 ; D ) , supporting the hypothesis that PINCH is a negative regulator of the JNK pathway in both dorsal and thorax closure .
We purified Drosophila PINCH in complex with its binding partners using tandem affinity purification ( TAP ) - tagged PINCH ( TAP-PINCH ; ) .
stck homozygous mutant embryos rescued with a TAP : PINCH transgene driven by the endogenous stck promoter to wild-type levels ( A ) afford material for purification of soluble , cytoplasmic TAP-PINCH complexes in the absence of endogenous PINCH protein .
Three partners that copurified stoichiometrically with TAP-PINCH from embryos , as well as in complex with TAP-PINCH from cultured Drosophila S2R + cells ( B ) , were identified by mass spectrometric analysis .
Consistent with what is observed in mammalian cells ( ) and our previous findings in Drosophila ( ) , ILK copurified with PINCH .
The Drosophila homologue of the parvin and actopaxin family of proteins , CG32528 , is also present in PINCH protein complexes .
Parvin is known to bind ILK and actin in mammalian systems ( ) , but the isolated Parvin/ILK/PINCH complexes are the first to be described in Drosophila .
Additionally , a novel 31-kD protein was identified as Drosophila CG9031 .
The CG9031 protein is 55 % identical and 74 % similar to human RSU-1 , a leucine rich repeat containing protein first identified as a suppressor of cell transformation by v-Ras ( ) and subsequently implicated in regulation of MAP kinase signaling , specifically the JNK and ERK cascades , when overexpressed in cultured cells ( ) .
Despite its potent ability to act as a tumor suppressor , little is known about the mechanism of action of RSU-1 .
Its partnership with the PINCH protein allows placement of RSU-1 in a molecular pathway that is linked to integrins .
Figure 3 .
PINCH and RSU-1 physically interact and colocalize .
( A ) Quantitative anti-PINCH Western analysis of PINCH levels in wild-type flies ( lane 1 ) versus TAP-PINCH-rescued flies ( lane 2 ) .
( B ) Silver stained gel of purified proteins from S2R + stably transfected with empty vector ( lane 1 ) or pMT and TAP-PINCH ( lane 2 ) .
( C ) Western blots of Ni-NTA purified His tagged complexes from S2 cells .
RSU-1 interacts with full-length PINCH , but not LIM1-3 .
( D ) Yeast two-hybrid reporter activity : growth on medium lacking histidine and adenine ( + / - ) and beta-galactosidase activity relative to empty vector bait and RSU -1 prey .
( E ) Confocal images of P [ w + GFP-PINCH ] stck 18 / l ( 3 ) 097 stage 16 embryo shows that PINCH : GFP ( green ) and RSU-1 ( magenta ) colocalize ( white ) at muscle attachment sites ( arrows ) and in the pharynx ( arrowhead ) and gut ( asterisk ) .
Bar , 100 mum .
To assess the specificity and nature of the interaction between PINCH and RSU-1 , domain mapping studies were performed in cell culture and in yeast two-hybrid assays .
Drosophila RSU-1 copurifies with full-length His tagged PINCH , but not with a truncated His tagged PINCH containing only LIM1-3 ( C ) , confirming the specificity of the interaction and suggesting LIM4 and and or 5 is the site of binding .
ILK , which binds LIM1 of PINCH , copurifies with both full-length and the truncated LIM1-3 version of His tagged PINCH ( C ) , serving as a positive control .
Both PINCH and ILK are copurified with His tagged RSU-1 ( C ) .
Moreover , endogenous PINCH and RSU-1 can be coimmunoprecipitated ( unpublished data ) .
The site of RSU-1 binding to PINCH was further mapped using yeast two-hybrid analysis .
Only cells expressing LIM5 bait and RSU -1 prey activated all three reporters ( D ) , indicating LIM5 is the site of RSU-1 binding .
Consistent with the view that they interact in vivo , PINCH : GFP and RSU-1 are prominently colocalized at integrin rich muscle attachment sites in Drosophila embryos ( E ) .
Drosophila RSU-1 , which displays seven leucine rich repeats with high sequence similarity to small GTPase regulators , is encoded by the CG9031 locus .
We have characterized a P-element insertion allele that disrupts the RSU-1 coding sequence ( A ) .
Flies homozygous for this mutation within CG9031 are viable and fertile ( unpublished data ) , and lack RSU-1 protein as indicated by Western analysis with multiple anti-RSU-1 antibodies ( B ) .
PINCH and RSU-1 are both expressed in larval wing discs ( C ) and similar to stck wing clones ( ) , the mutation within CG9031 produces flies with wing blisters ( D ) at 60 % penetrance .
These data are consistent with PINCH and RSU-1 acting in concert to support integrin dependent adhesion .
We have named the CG9031 gene icarus ( ics ) after the son of Daedalus who had unstable wings .
Figure 4 .
ics encodes RSU-1 .
( A ) The gene encoding RSU-1 , located on chromosome 2 at cytological position 34C6 , comprises three exons ( coding regions shaded ) .
Location of the peptide antigens used for antibody production ( bars ) and P-element insertion allele ( triangle ; Drosophila Gene Disruption Project , http://www.fruitfly.org/p_disrupt/index.html ) are indicated .
( B ) Western blots of third instar larval extracts using antibodies directed against the amino or carboxy termini of RSU-1 .
( C ) PINCH and RSU-1 are expressed in wing discs .
( D ) ics homozygotes display wing blisters .
Although elimination of RSU-1 function does not result in dorsal or thorax closure defects ( unpublished data ) , we evaluated the role of RSU-1 in these processes by testing for genetic interactions between ics and msn .
Similar to what occurs with reduction of stck dosage ( A ) , homozygous mutation of ics suppresses DC defects observed in msn 102 mutant embryos ( P < 0.001 ; A ) .
Absence of RSU-1 also increases eclosure rates ( P < 0.0001 ) of msn 3349 hypomorphs ( B ) and completely suppresses the thorax defects present in msn 3349 animals ( unpublished data ) , suggesting that like PINCH , RSU-1 can function as a negative regulator of JNK signaling .
To confirm that the suppression of msn DC defects by ics mutation is mediated by the JNK signaling cascade , we eliminated RSU-1 in basket ( bsk ) embryos that lack zygotic JNK , the terminal kinase in this cascade .
Homozygous ics mutation suppresses the DC defects of bsk 1 mutants ( P < 0.001 ; C ) , confirming that ics loss-of-function mutations affect DC by influencing the JNK cascade .
Moreover , wing discs isolated from ics mutants display a 30 % increase in active phospho-JNK relative to wild type ( D ) , providing direct biochemical confirmation that RSU-1 influences JNK activation state in vivo .
Although we have not detected any localized accumulation of RSU-1 during DC ( unpublished data ) , RSU-1 is readily detected by Western analysis in stage 13 embryos that are undergoing DC ( E , lane 1 ) .
Thus , the temporal pattern of RSU-1 expression is consistent with genetic results that highlight its role in regulation of JNK dependent morphogenesis .
Figure 5 .
RSU-1 modulates JNK signaling and forms a stabilized complex with PINCH .
( A ) Comparison of DC defects in msn 102 versus ics ; msn 102 embryos as in A. ( B ) Comparison of percent eclosure in msn 3349 and ics ; msn 3349 flies as in D. ( C ) Comparison of DC defects in bsk 1 versus bsk 1 ; ics embryos .
( D ) Quantification from Western blots ( n = 6 ) of phospho-JNK levels in third instar larval wing discs .
Total JNK levels were unchanged ( not depicted ) .
( E ) Quantitative anti-PINCH and anti-RSU-1 Western blots of w 1118 ( lane 1 ) , stck germ line clone ( lane 2 ) , and ics ( lane 3 ) stage 13 whole embryo lysates .
Coomassie staining confirms equal loading .
( F ) Proposed model for PINCH action in JNK and integrin signaling .
Analysis of PINCH and RSU-1 levels in wild-type versus stck or ics mutant embryos provided insight into the physiological significance of their association .
In embryos mutant for both maternal and zygotic stck , RSU-1 is dramatically reduced relative to wild-type levels ( E , lane 2 ) .
Likewise , in ics embryos , PINCH levels are also decreased ( E , lane 3 ) .
These observations suggest that PINCH and RSU-1 are reciprocally dependent on each other for maximal expression and and or stability .
The mechanism for coordinate regulation of RSU-1 and PINCH remains to be determined .
Because the phenotypes associated with loss of RSU-1 represent a subset of stck phenotypes , the processes disturbed in ics mutants may be exquisitely sensitive to PINCH levels .
Alternately , RSU-1 may have functions that are independent of its role in PINCH stabilization .
Our data are consistent with a model ( F ) in which PINCH could modulate JNK signaling in two distinct ways .
First , PINCH is present at areas where JNK is active and antagonizes JNK signaling .
This behavior is reminiscent of Drosophila Puc , a phosphatase regulator of the JNK cascade that establishes a negative feedback loop ( ) .
PINCH has no intrinsic catalytic activity , but might recruit proteins that could alter the availability or activity of JNK signaling components .
Like Puc , PINCH expression is up regulated in response to constitutive JNK signaling ( ) .
Availability of RSU-1 at these sites of active JNK signaling could independently regulate JNK signaling or modulate the effects of PINCH on JNK through regulation of PINCH stability .
Second , PINCH and RSU-1 are required for integrin dependent adhesion .
PINCH has previously been shown to link integrins to the actin cytoskeleton via ILK and Parvin , and these connections could influence both integrin dependent adhesion and signaling .
Integrin signaling , through a variety of tyrosine kinases and Rac , stimulates the JNK cascade ( ) ; therefore , PINCH may also exert an influence on JNK signaling via integrin .
Our findings illustrate that the cellular concentration of PINCH affects the level of RSU-1 and vice versa .
Thus , modulation of the ratio of RSU-1 to PINCH could provide a mechanism to regulate JNK signaling during DC and thorax closure in Drosophila .
We hypothesize that PINCH and RSU -1 complexes fine-tune and integrate the JNK and integrin signaling cascades required during morphogenesis , highlighting the potential role of integrin associated apical junctional complexes as signal coordination points for epithelial morphogenesis .
Materials and methods
Fly genetics
PINCH : GFP and PINCH : TAP transgenics used standard methods .
For msn 102 dorsal open rescue , msn 102 / TM3 , Sb flies were crossed to same and to msn 102 stck 18 / TM3 , Sb , or ics ; msn 102 / TM3 , Sb flies were crossed to same .
For of the bsk 1 dorsal open rescue , bsk 1 / CyO or bsk 1 ; ics and CyO flies were crossed to same .
For rescue of msn 3349 , msn 3349 / TM3 , Sb flies were crossed to same and to msn 3349 stck 18 / TM3 , Sb , or ics ; msn 3349 / TM3 , Sb flies were crossed to same .
Embryos lacking maternal PINCH were generated using the FLP-FRT system ( ) .
Immunochemistry and microscopy
Rabbit polyclonal antisera were generated ( Harlan Bioproducts ) using antigens of the first and last 15 amino acids of Drosophila RSU-1 .
Antibodies used were rabbit anti-ACTIVE-JNK ( Promega ) , anti-JNK ( ) , and anti-PINCH ; mouse anti-ILK ( BD Scientific ) , anti-phosphotyrosine 4G10 ( Upstate Biotechnology ) , anti-penta His ( QIAGEN ) , anti-beta-PS integrin ( CF6G11 ) , and anti-LacZ ( 40-1a ) ( DSHB , University of Iowa , Iowa City , IA ) .
Drosophila embryos and third instar larval wing discs were prepared as described previously ( ) .
Confocal images were acquired at RT on an confocal microscope ( model FV300 ; Olympus ) , using 20x 0.7 NA dry and 60x 1.4 NA oil immersion objectives , and were assembled using ImageJ and Adobe Photoshop 7.0 .
Third instar larval wing discs ( n = 10-25 ) were homogenized and quantitatively immunoblotted for JNK and activated JNK as described previously ( ) .
DNA constructs
Plasmids for expression of tagged PINCH or RSU-1 were constructed by standard molecular biology techniques .
for details ( available at http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200408090/DC1 ) .
PINCH complex purifications
10 g pCaspin-TAP-rescued stck embryos or 5 x 10 8 Drosophila S2R + cells stably transfected with pMT and TAP-PINCH were washed and homogenized in lysis buffer ( TBS , pH 7.9 , plus 0.1 % Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors ) and 125,000 g soluble portion was used as described below .
S2R + cells were grown as recommended ( Invitrogen ) and lysed , and 30,000 g supernatant was batch bound to 100 mul IgG Sepharose ( Amersham Biosciences ) prepared per manufacturer 's recommendations and equilibrated in lysis buffer .
After washing extensively with lysis buffer , proteins were eluted with a step gradient of 100 mM glycine from pH 5.0-2 .75 .
Ni-NTA agarose ( QIAGEN ) purifications of His tagged proteins used standard techniques .
Mass spectrometry
TAP-PINCH complexes were TCA precipitated and resuspended in Tris buffer , 8M urea , pH 8.6 , reduced , and alkylated .
Complexes were endoproteinase Lys-C digested ( 4 h ) , diluted to 2M urea , and digested with trypsin overnight ( ) .
Peptide mixtures were loaded onto a triphasic LC and LC column and analyzed as described previously ( ) .
Tandem mass spectra were analyzed using SEQUEST and the Drosophila sequence database with threshold values of 1.8 ( +1 ) , 2.8 ( +2 ) , and 3.5 ( +3 ) ( ) .
Identities of specific bands were confirmed by sequence analysis .
Yeast two-hybrid
PINCH baits depicted in C were constructed in pGBD-C1 ( ) .
The full-length RSU-1 prey is cloned in pACT2 .
The yeast host strain , PJ69-2a , was transformed with bait and prey , and then reporter activities were assayed as described previously ( ) .
Online supplemental material
Fig .
S1 shows pleitropic phenotypes of maternally deficient stck cuticles .
Details of plasmid construction are provided in Fig .
S2 .
Online supplemental material available at http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200408090/DC1 .
