Evaluation of HER-2 / neu gene amplification and protein expression in non small cell lung carcinomas
HER-2 / neu gene amplification and cell surface overexpression are important factors in breast cancer for prognosis and prediction of sensitivity to anti-HER-2 / neu monoclonal antibody therapy .
In lung cancer , the clinical significance of HER-2 / neu expression is currently under evaluation .
We investigated 238 non small lung carcinomas for HER-2 / neu protein overexpression by immunohistochemistry using the HercepTest .
We found 2+ or 3+ overexpression in 39 patients ( 16 % ) , including 35 % in adenocarcinomas and 20 % in large cell carcinomas , but only 1 % of squamous cell carcinomas .
Marked ( 3+ ) overexpression was uncommon ( 4 % ) .
The association between protein expression and gene copy number per cell , as determined by fluorescence in situ hybridisation assay , was investigated in 51 of these NSCLC tumours .
Twenty-seven tumours ( 53 % ) were negative by both tests .
Marked ( 3+ ) protein expression and gene amplification were present in only 4 % of samples .
In 11 tumours ( 21 % ) , gene gain was accompanied by chromosomal aneusomy and did not result in high protein levels while in 7 ( 14 % ) the score 2+ was associated with maximum number of signals per cell < 9 .
The prognostic implication of HER-2 / neu protein expression was studied in 187 surgically resected tumours .
No statistical difference in survival was observed comparing patients with positive ( 2+ / 3+ ) and negative tumours ( 0 and 1+ ) , although 3+ patients showed a tendency to shorter survival .
The therapeutic implications of protein expression and gene amplification in lung cancer need to be examined in prospective clinical trials .
British Journal of Cancer ( 2002 ) 86 , 1449-1456 .
DOI : 10.1038 / sj/bjc/6600286 www.bjcancer.com
( c ) 2002 Cancer Research UK
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women in the US ( ) .
A better understanding of the biologic pathways that drive neoplastic cellular proliferation has led to the development of targeted therapies aimed at specific proteins in these pathways .
Among these are trastuzumab ( Herceptin R ) , a humanised monoclonal antibody that recognises the HER-2 / neu protein receptor .
The human HER-2 / neu oncogene is located on chromosome 17 and encodes a transmembrane glycoprotein of 185 kD , which has intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity ( ) , and shares sequence homology with the epidermal growth factor receptor .
HER-2 / neu overexpression has been observed by various diagnostic modalities in 20-30 % of human breast cancers and is associated with a poorer overall survival and resistance to hormone based therapy .
Trastuzumab was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) for the treatment of breast cancer patients whose tumours overexpress HER-2 / neu .
Trastuzumab produced objective responses in 26 % of previously untreated breast cancer patients ( ) and 15 % of breast cancer patients in the second line setting ( ) .
Response rates were considerably higher when trastuzumab was combined with doxorubicin or paclitaxel ( 45 % ) , and breast cancer patients treated with the combination had higher response rates and longer survival than patients treated with doxorubicin or paclitaxel alone ( ) .
Several studies evaluated HER-2 / neu oncogene and protein expression in lung cancers using immunohistochemical ( IHC ) techniques .
These studies reported overexpression of HER-2 / neu in 27-57 % of patients with non small cell lung carcinomas ( NSCLC ) , with adenocarcinomas having the highest rates of overexpression .
This wide variation in frequency is likely to be related to differences in the methodologies tested and patient populations studied .
The overexpression of HER-2 / neu in NSCLC has been associated with a poorer survival and shortened time to relapse but these studies were limited by small sample sizes and multivariate analysis was not performed .
Additionally , in NSCLC cell lines , overexpression of HER-2 / neu has been reported to be associated with resistance to chemotherapeutic agents ( ) and a synergistic effect was obtained when trastuzumab was combined with chemotherapeutic agents ( ) .
The application of trastuzumab for the treatment of human lung cancers that overexpress HER-2 / neu is under investigation .
In breast cancer , a comparison between IHC and fluorescence in situ hybridisation ( FISH ) analyses showed FISH to be the method of choice for predicting the clinical outcome ( ) .
The method of choice and the level of HER-2 / neu protein expression required to obtain a potential therapeutic effect from trastuzumab monoclonal antibody therapy has not yet been established in lung cancer .
The purpose of this investigation was to characterise HER-2 / neu in primary lung cancers at protein and gene levels using the HercepTest and DNA FISH probes .
Furthermore , the prognostic impact of the HER-2 / neu protein expression was studied on a series of 187 tissue microarrayed lung tumours .
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Comparison of immunohistochemistry ( IHC ) and fluorescence in situ hybridisation ( FISH )
For the comparison of IHC and FISH , we studied 51 patients with primary NSCLC treated at the University of Colorado and the Veterans Administration Hospitals , Denver , CO. .
Sections of tumour tissue were obtained by informed consent through the Histopathology Core of the University of Colorado Cancer Center .
The tumour blocks were fixed in 10 % buffered formalin for 5-10h and embedded in paraffin .
The blocks were cut in consecutive 4-micron sections .
One section was stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin ( H&E ) , and classified according to the World Health Organisation ( WHO ) histologic classification of lung tumours ( ) .
Areas rich in viable tumour cells were selected in the H&E slides and subsequent sections were submitted for FISH and HercepTest analyses in a blinded fashion .
The clinical characteristics of these patients were as follows : There were 39 males and 12 females , and the median age was 65 years ( range 46-79 ) .
According to the clinical stage , 15 patients were classified in stage 1A , 17 in stage IB , four in stage IIA , four in stage IIB and 11 in stage IIIA .
Histologically , there were 24 adenocarcinomas , five large cell carcinomas ( LCC ) , and 22 squamous cell carcinomas ( SCC ) .
As positive controls , we used 12 pre-selected breast cancer specimens taken from the Histopathologic Core and known to be strongly positive ( 3+ ) by the HercepTest method .
In addition , 12 normal lung samples were selected from autopsy material from patients without any history of neoplastic or non neoplastic pulmonary disease .
Immunohistochemistry ( IHC ) assay
The IHC procedure followed the DAKO 's protocol ( DAKO Corporation , Glostrup , Denmark ) for the HercepTest .
In brief , the sections were deparaffinised , hydrated , and the antigen retrieval was performed at 95degreesC in citrate buffer for 40min .
The slides were then cooled at room temperature for 20min , washed with TRIS-buffer 3x3min , and the peroxidase blocking was performed for 5min .
After rewashing , the primary antibody was applied for 30min .
Following the application of the secondary antibody the substrate-chromogen solution ( DAB ) was added as a visualisation reagent .
Finally the slides were counterstained with Hematoxylin .
Evaluation of the HercepTest followed the manufacturer 's recommendation with a slight modification .
Each sample was placed into one of four categories ( 0 , 1+ , 2+ , 3+ ) .
Tumours with complete absence of staining were scored as 0 , those with weak , incomplete membranous staining were classified as 1+ .
Tumours with either strong , incomplete basolateral staining or weak , complete membranous staining in greater than 10 % of the tumour cells were classified as 2+ , and those with strong , complete membranous staining in greater than 10 % of the tumour cells were classified as 3+ .
According to the HercepTest protocol , all tumours classified as 2+ and 3+ were considered ' positive ' , and all tumours scored as 0 or 1+ were classified as ' negative ' .
Two observers ( WA Franklin and FR Hirsch ) scored each slide , discrepancies were discussed , and a consensus score provided .
Fluorescence in situ hybridisation ( FISH ) assay
Tissue sections were incubated at 65degreesC for 4h , deparaffinized in three xylene washes for 10min , and dehydrated in 100 % ethanol .
After incubation in 2xstandard sodium citrate-SSC ( pH7 .0 ) at 75degreesC for 20-25min , sections were digested with proteinase K ( 0.25 mgml -1 in 2xSSC , pH7 .0 ) at 37degreesC for 20-25min , rinsed in 2xSSC ( pH7 .0 ) at room temperature for 5min , and dehydrated in ethanol series .
Dual-target , dual-colour FISH assays were performed using the PathVysion Her2 DNA probe kit ( Vysis , Downers Grove , IL , USA ) , including the LSI Her2 sequence labelled in SpectrumOrange and the chromosome 17 centromere sequence labelled in SpectrumGreen .
The probe set was applied to the selected area on each slide , the hybridisation area was covered with a glass coverslip and sealed with rubber cement .
The slides were incubated at 80degreesC for 10min for co-denaturation of chromosomal and probe DNA 's and hybridisation was allowed to occur in a humidified chamber at 37degreesC for 16-20h .
Post-hybridisation washes were performed in 1.5 M urea and 0 .1 xSSC ( pH7.0-7 .5 ) at 45degreesC for 30min and in 2xSSC for 2min at room temperature .
After dehydration in an ethanol series , DAPI ( 0.15 mgml -1 in Vectashield Mounting Medium ) was applied for chromatin counterstaining .
Each FISH assay included one or two normal lung sections used as negative control , one or two sections from breast adenocarcinomas previously identified as carrying HER2 amplification used as positive control and five or six sections of lung carcinomas .
Microscopic analysis was performed on an Olympus BX60 brightfield and epifluorescence microscope equipped with the Quips XL genetic workstation ( Applied Imaging , Santa Clara , CA , USA ) .
Fluorescence signals were scored using single-band filters for DAPI , FITC , and Texas red , a double-band pass filter ( FITC and Texas red ) and a triple-band pass filter ( DAPI , FITC and Texas red , Chroma Technology , Brattleboro , VT , USA ) .
Representative images of each specimen were acquired with a SenSys cooled CCD camera ( Photometrics , Tucson , AZ , USA ) in monochromatic layers which were subsequently merged by the SmartCapture software ( Vysis , Downers Grove , IL , USA ) .
The histological areas previously selected in the H&E - stained sections were identified in the FISH treated slides .
At least 200 non overlapping interphase nuclei per site were scored for both HER-2 / neu and chromosome 17 centromere signals , following strict scoring guidelines and constant adjustment of microscope focus since signals located at different focal planes .
Two independent observers ( L Chen and M Varella-Garcia ) performed analysis in a blinded fashion .
All requisite techniques involved were previously validated and results of scoring were found to be reproducible between the two independent operators .
Prognostic implication of HER2 protein expression
Anonymous primary tumour tissue samples from patients diagnosed with non small cell lung cancer pathological stage ( pStage ) I-III were obtained from the University of Colorado Cancer Center ( UCCC ) and the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions ( JHMI ) from 1993 through 1999 .
The Colorado and the JHMI Institutional Review Boards approved the study protocol .
A total of 187 patients with complete medical records were followed by the UCCC and JHMI tumour registries for survival time and outcome , and had adequate formalin fixed , paraffin embedded tissue blocks available for tissue microarray ( TMA ) construction .
The study population included 111 males and 76 females with a median age of 65 years .
Ninety-four per cent of the patients underwent thoracotomy , in which lobectomy were performed in the majority of cases .
Surgical margins were positive for tumour involvement in 8 % .
Mediastinoscopy with lymph node resection was performed in the 11 non resectable patients .
The tumours were staged according to the International Union Against Cancer ( UICC ) TNM classification , and histologically subtyped and graded according to the WHO guidelines ( ) .
Histopathologic examination revealed that 52 % of the patients had pStage I disease .
There were 95 SCC , 73 adenocarcinomas , 10 bronchoalveolar carcinomas ( BAC ) , and 15 LCC .
Of all tumours , 52 % were poorly differentiated .
Median follow-up was 51 months ( range 18-100 ) .
Demographic and clinical data were collected retrospectively .
None of the patients received radiotherapy or chemotherapy prior to surgery .
The IHC procedure was the same as described above .
All tumour and control tissues were reviewed by two pathologists ( R Veve and WA Franklin ) .
Tissue microarray construction
H&E stained sections were selected for tumour viability .
Each slide was marked , and the point in the corresponding paraffin block was sampled for TMA construction .
The TMAs were assembled using a tissue arraying instrument ( Beecher Instruments , Silver Springs , MD , USA ) , consisting of thin walled stainless steel biopsy needles and stylets used to empty and transfer the needle content from the donor to recipient block .
The assembly is held in an X-Y position guide that is manually adjusted by micrometers .
Briefly , the instrument was used to create holes in a recipient paraffin block and to acquire tissue cores from the donor block by a thin walled needle .
The cylindrical sample was retrieved from the selected region in the donor block and extruded directly into the recipient block with defined array coordinates .
A solid stylet , closely fit in the needle , was used to transfer the tissue cores into the recipient block .
Taking tumour heterogeneity into account , we used a large diameter stylet ( 1.5 mm ) and the study specimens were routinely over-sampled with three replicate core samples of tumour ( different areas of the tumour ) and normal ( one , if present ) regions , from each donor block .
Normal lung and 15 other control specimens were included in each of the tissue array blocks .
Multiple 4muM sections were cut with a Leitz microtome .
Sections were transferred to adhesive coated slides using the adhesive coated tape sectioning system ( Instrumedics , Hackensack , NJ , USA ) as described by .
Subsequently , UV light treatment of the slides for 60s polymerised the adhesive coating into a plastic layer and sealed the sections to the slides .
The tape was then removed in a TPC solvent ( Instrumedics , Hackensack , NJ , USA ) .
The sections were then deparaffinized with standard xylene and hydrated through graded alcohols into water .
One section from each tissue array block was H&E stained and coverslipped .
The remaining sections were stored at room temperature for IHC staining .
Statistical analysis
Spearman correlation coefficient was used to examine the relationship between the maximum and the average number of the HER-2 / neu gene per cell and the ratio gene and chromosome by histology .
The Mantel-Haenszel Chi-square test was applied to examine the differences in linear trend of HercepTest score and HER-2 / neu copy number per cell across the histologic subtypes of lung cancer .
For the survival analysis , the Kaplan-Meier method was applied to estimate the lung cancer related survival for each category of HercepTest score .
The log-rank test was applied to examine the association between survival and HercepTest score .
All statistical analyses were carried out with SAS software ( SAS Institute , Cary , NC , USA ) .
RESULTS
Figure 3
Kaplan-Meier survival curves according to the results of HercepTest .
Figure 1
Typical staining patterns by immunohistochemistry ( HercepTest , Dako , Denmark ) : Normal epithelium with apical and lateral staining , but no basocellular staining ( Upper left ) .
Modified 2+ with a strong basolateral staining seen in some adenocarcinomas , but without complete membrane staining ( Upper right ) .
A moderate near complete membrane staining in more than 10 % of the cells , considered as 2+ ( lower left ) .
Complete strong membrane staining , considered as 3+ ( lower right ) .
Altogether , 238 patients with various NSCLC histologies were included in the analyses .
Thirty-nine patients ( 16 % ) had positive HercepTest score ( 2+ / 3+ ) , but only nine patients ( 4 % ) had a strong positive result ( 3+ ) .
The distribution of the results from the HercepTest according to the histological types is shown in .
Among 95 patients with adenocarcinomas , 33 patients ( 35 % ) had a HercepTest positive tumour , and four out of 20 LCC patients ( 20 % ) had a positive tumour .
Among 113 SCC patients , only one ( 1 % ) had a HercepTest positive tumour .
Typical staining patterns are illustrated in .
Correlation between FISH and IHC
Tumours from 51 of the patients were evaluated by both IHC and FISH techniques .
The distribution of the IHC results in this subset was not statistically different from the total set of 238 patients .
Strong positive staining ( 3+ ) was observed in 6 % of tumours , a positive 2+ result was found in 19 % , and 75 % of the tumours were negative ( 0-1+ ) .
The highest rates of positive staining were found among the adenocarcinomas ( 42 % ) and LCC ( 40 % ) , while only 5 % of the SCC were positive .
The difference across histological subtypes was statistically significant ( P < 0.05 , Mantel-Haenszel Chi-square test for linear association ) .
Figure 2
Dual-colour FISH assay using the PathVysion DNA probe ( Vysis ) in lung tissue sections .
HER-2 / neu probe is labelled in red ( SpectrumOrange ) and chromosome 17 probe is labelled in green ( SpectrumGreen ) .
Chromatin in staining in blue ( DAPI ) .
Gene amplification ( Gene and Chromosome ratio > 2.0 ) is illustrated in patients with adenocarcinomas with HercepTest score 0 in ( A ) and HercepTest score 3+ in ( B ) .
Small HER-2 / neu clusters ( Gene and Chromosome ratio 1.2 ) are illustrated in ( C ) for a patient with squamous cell carcinoma and HercepTest 1+ .
Balanced aneusomy ( Gene and Chromosome ratio 1.0 ) is shown in an adenocarcinoma patient with HercepTest score 2+ ( D ) .
In the FISH study each tumour was assessed by the average and the maximum numbers of copies of the HER-2 / neu gene per cell , the average ratio of HER-2 / neu gene to chromosome 17 copy numbers , and the pattern of signal presentation .
There was a strong and significant correlation between maximum and average HER-2 / neu copy numbers per cell ( Spearman correlation coefficient = 0.93 ; P < 0.001 ) .
There was also a significant correlation between the maximum HER-2 / neu copy number and the ratio of HER-2 / neu to chromosome 17 ( Spearman correlation coefficient = 0.54 , P < 0.001 ) .
The average number of HER-2 / neu gene signals per cell was 2.9 and the average number of chromosome 17 signals was 2.6 .
The average ratio gene and chromosome signals was 1.2 .
Of these 51 NSCLCs , only two ( 4 % ) had a maximum of > 16 copies of the HER-2 / neu gene per cell ( mean = five copies and cell ) with a gene and chromosome ratio > 2 , indicating true gene amplification .
The HER-2 / neu signals in these two tumours were presented in a clustered pattern , consistent with that expected in homogenously staining regions ( ) .
Fifteen cases ( 29 % ) had a maximum of 9-16 copies of the gene per cell ( mean = three copies and cell ) .
Small clusters of signals were observed in seven of these 15 samples ( ) .
In 26 cases ( 55 % ) , the maximum number of copies per cells was 5-8 ( mean = 2.6 copies and cell ) , and in eight cases ( 16 % ) was < 5 ( mean = 1.6 copes and cell ) .
Except for the two tumours with clustered amplification , all other tumours had gene and chromosome ratios > = 1.5 .
Therefore , in the NSCLC tumours , increased number of copies of HER-2 / neu per cell were largely due to chromosomal polysomy and both fluorescent signals ( red for the gene , green for the chromosome 17 ) displayed a scattered pattern as illustrated in .
In the normal lung specimens used as negative controls , the maximum number of copies of the HER-2 / neu gene per cell was three , the average was 1.8 and the average ratio gene to chromosome was 1.0 .
In contrast , all of the 12 breast cancer samples used as positive controls had a clustered HER-2 / neu gene amplification .
The maximum number of copies ranged from 14 to 30 and averaged 21.0 .
The average number of copies per cell was 6.6 and the average ratio of gene and chromosome was 2.5 .
The HER-2 / neu gene copy number per cell did not differ significantly among the NSCLC histologic subtypes ( P > 0.05 in the Mantel-Haenszel Chi-Square test ) , but the normal lung samples were statistically different from the cancer samples .
The maximum number of copies of HER-2 / neu per cell averaged 8.1 in adenocarcinomas , 8.8 in LCC , and 7.1 in SCC .
The average copy number of HER-2 / neu per cell was 2.8 in adenocarcinomas , 3.4 in LCC , and 2.7 in SCC .
As presented in , both of the lung tumour samples with a maximum number of HER-2 / neu copies per cell > 16 were adenocarcinomas ( 4 % ) .
Among the 15 lung cancer samples with a maximum of 9-16 copies of HER-2 / neu per cell , six were adenocarcinomas , six were SCC and three were LCC .
Among the 34 tumours with a maximum < 9 copies of HER-2 / neu per cell , there were 16 adenocarcinomas , 16 SCC , and two LCC .
Twenty-seven tumours ( 53 % ) with HercepTest score of 0 and 1+ and a maximum number of copies of HER-2 / neu per cell from < 9 were considered negative by both analyses .
Six tumours ( 12 % ) with HercepTest score 2+ / 3+ and the maximum number of copies of HER-2 / neu per cell < = 9 were considered positive by both analyses .
Discordant results were observed in 18 cases ( 35 % ) .
In seven ( 14 % ) , the HercepTest was 2+ and the maximum number of copies of HER-2 / neu per cell was < 9 ; in the remaining 11 ( 21 % ) there was a maximum of < = 9 copies of HER-2 / neu per cell and the HercepTest score was 0 or 1+ .
Prognostic impact of HER-2 / neu protein expression
Altogether 187 patients with NSCLC were examined for prognosis related to HER-2 / neu expression .
Thirty-four tumours ( 18 % ) were positive by HercepTest ( 2+ / 3+ ) , but only six ( 3 % ) were strongly positive ( 3+ ) .
Among 91 SCC , 8 tumours ( 9 % ) were positive and all of them had 2+ HercepTest score .
In contrast , among the 96 tumours with non squamous histologies , 26 ( 27 % ) had a positive HercepTest score , and six of them were 3+ .
Seventy-one tumours were adenocarcinomas , from which 23 ( 32 % ) were positive and five ( 7 % ) were 3+ .
Kaplan-Meier survival curves for the different groups are presented in .
Based on the 187 patients , no difference in survival was found comparing patients with positive ( HercepTest 2+ / 3+ , n = 34 ) and negative ( HercepTest 0 and 1+ , n = 153 pts ) tumours ( P = 0.86 ) .
The 3-year and 5-year survival was 70 and 58 % for the HER-2 / neu positive patients , and 66 and 60 % for the negative patients .
When the 3+ patients were analysed separately ( n = 6 ) , the survival for these patients tended to be shorter ( 3-year and 5-year survival = 50 % ) .
However , statistical analysis was not performed due to the small number of patients .
No difference in survival was observed for patients with squamous histology comparing those with HER-2 / neu positive ( n = 8 ) and negative ( n = 83 ) tumours ( P = 0.60 ) .
Similarly , no difference in survival was observed comparing patients with positive ( n = 26 ) and negative ( n = 70 ) tumors in the non squamous histology categories ( P = 0.91 ) .
DISCUSSION
In the current study , we found HER-2 / neu overexpression ( 2+ and 3+ ) by IHC in 16 % of the NSCLC tumours , most frequently in adenocarcinomas ( 35 % ) and LCC ( 20 % ) .
These results are similar to most reports of NSCLC in the literature .
Exceptions are some recent studies , in which lower frequencies of NSCLC tumours with HER-2 / neu overexpression were reported .
Discrepancies among the reported frequencies might be due to different factors , including distribution of histological types , tissue processing , criteria for the scoring and interpretation of the staining results .
No standard immunohistochemical protocol has been developed for lung cancer .
The HercepTest was developed and approved by the US FDA for evaluation of HER-2 / neu in breast cancer .
Lung tumours are , however , morphologically more heterogeneous than malignant breast tumours , which increases the difficulties in the interpretation of the HER-2 / neu staining results .
We observed that a few lung adenocarcinomas ( < 5 % ) had a strong basolateral staining , but not a complete membrane staining .
Because of the incomplete membrane staining , these tumours might have been classified by others as ' negative ' , according to the HercepTest .
However , because of the strong intensity of the staining pattern , we classified these tumours as having 2+ results ( ) .
This could give a slightly higher frequency of positive adenocarcinomas compared to other studies .
However , the clinical significance of this scoring may not be relevant because 2+ tumours do not have a worse prognosis and may not have a significant benefit from HER-2 / neu targeted therapy .
The HER-2 / neu gene status has been scarcely investigated in lung tumours .
We evaluated the copy number of HER-2 / neu sequences per cell using a dual-colour FISH assay which included the gene probe and the centromere probe as a control .
There is no uniform criterion to determine gene amplification by FISH .
There is a general consensus that gene and chromosome ratio > 2 represents gene amplification , however , other parameters have also been used .
For instance , found that the maximum number of copies of HER-2 / neu in breast cancer cells correlated with the worsening of the prognosis supporting that this is a good index for assessing amplification .
In the current study , we demonstrated that the maximum number of copies of HER-2 / neu per cell in lung tumours was positively correlated both with the average number of HER-2 / neu per cell and the gene and chromosome ratio .
Therefore , either one of these indices may be useful for studying prognostic and therapeutical implications of the HER-2 overexpression .
When comparing IHC and FISH results , the HercepTest showed positive results ( 2+ / 3+ ) in 25 % of cases while the FISH showed < = 9 copies of the HER-2 / neu gene per cell in 32 % of cases but < = 16 copies of HER-2 / neu per cell in only 4 % of cases .
Overall , HER-2 / neu overexpression was more common in adenocarcinomas and LCC and less common in SCC both at the surface protein level and at the gene level .
HER-2 / neu gene amplification , represented by the gene and chromosome ratio > 2 was uncommon in the NSCLCs ( two patients = 4 % ) and even when considering the adenocarcinomas , the fraction of tumours with a maximum HER-2 / neu copy number per cell > 16 was 8 % .
Other studies , such as and also detected clustered amplification only in rare cases of NSCLC .
Disomic status for chromosome 17 was only found in 16 % of the NSCLC tumours included in our study .
In the majority of these tumours , there were increased numbers of copies of HER-2 / neu gene per cell accompanied by a balanced chromosome gain ( gene and chromosome ration ~ 1 ) .
Since low levels of HER-2 / neu cell surface protein expression was the most common finding in these tumours , the results support the conclusion that the extensive chromosome 17 polysomy detected in lung tumours is not associated with HER-2 / neu protein overexpression .
Other detailed studies comparing the levels of HER-2 / neu protein expression by IHC with different levels of gene gain and amplification by FISH have not been published in lung tumours .
Comparing our results with the large series of breast tumours reported by , a marked gene amplification and protein overexpression was considerably more common in breast than in lung cancers ( 13 % vs 4 % for FISH results , 11 % vs 6 % for IHC results ) .
Similarly , the complete lack of protein surface expression ( score 0 ) and gene copy numbers per cell < 4 were also more common in breast than in lung cancer ( 55 % vs 15 % for FISH , 70 % vs 36 % for IHC ) .
None of the lung cancers in our series , including adenocarcinomas , had a maximum copy number per cell > 32 whereas 5 % of the breast cancers have been reported in this category ( ) .
More often lung cancers had marked chromosomal aneusomy , with a balanced increase in the number of copies of chromosome 17 and HER-2 / neu gene copies .
This balanced increase does not represent true gene amplification and its clinical implications remain to be determined .
There was a good correlation between the IHC and FISH results in two-thirds of the tumours investigated .
In the discrepant cases , there were either increased aneusomy ( no gene amplification ) without increased levels in the protein expression or increased protein expression without significant increase in the number of copies of the gene .
Discrepancies between protein expression ( IHC ) and the gene status ( FISH ) have also been reported in breast tumours ( ) .
Interestingly , one of our patients with true gene amplification by FISH had a negative score by IHC ( ) .
There are several potential reasons for these discrepant results comparing IHC with FISH .
The discrepancies might be due to quality of fixation and tissue processing , as well as disturbances in the transcriptional or post-transcriptional controlling mechanisms .
The clinical relevance of gene amplification or protein overexpression of HER-2 / neu in HSCLC as detected by FISH and IHC assays remains to be determined .
Applying the HercepTest to a tissue microarray of 187 surgically resected lung tumours , we could not demonstrate any statistically significant difference in prognosis between patients with negative ( 0 and 1+ ) and with positive tumours ( 2+ / 3+ ) .
A tendency of shorter survival was observed for patients with 3+ tumours but no statistical analysis could be done due to the small number of patients in this category .
Theoretically it might be predicted that the protein expression would be superior for assessing response to trastuzumab therapy because the antibody binds to the cell surface protein .
In breast cancer , however , FISH technique has been demonstrated to be a more accurate and reliable method for selecting patients eligible for treatment with trastuzumab .
In our previous studies with lung cancer cell lines , we detected a positive correlation between HER-2 / neu expression by IHC and effectiveness of treatment with trastuzumab alone or in combination with cytostatic drugs ( ) .
In lung cancer patients , we currently do not know which level of HER-2 / neu protein expression or gene gain and amplification will have prognostic and therapeutic implications .
These questions need to be addressed in prospective trials .
Based on the clinical experience from the breast cancer studies , it might be of interest to focus on NSCLC patients with 3+ IHC results and and or those having tumours with gene amplification .
Data from the current and other studies ( ) show that these conditions seem to be limited to adenocarcinomas and LCC .
Thus , the number of patients who might be candidates for trastuzumab treatment seems to be more limited in the NSCLC population than in the breast cancer population , and such prospective clinical trials in NSCLC will require multicenter studies .
However , taken the large amount of NSCLC patients into account , still many patients might benefit from such a treatment .
Clinical trials with trastuzumab in lung cancer should assess HER-2 / neu expression by both methods to determine which test is superior for predicting response .
