The Role of Semaphorins and Their Receptors in Gliomas
Gliomas are the most common tumor in the central nervous system .
High-grade glioblastomas are characterized by their high invasiveness and resistance to radiotherapy , leading to high recurrence rate and short median survival despite radical surgical resection .
Characterizations of gliomas at molecular level have revealed aberrations of various growth factor receptors , receptor tyrosine kinases , and tumor suppressor genes that lead to deregulation of multiple signaling pathways , thereby contributing to abnormal proliferation , invasion , and resistance to apoptosis in cancer cells .
Recently , accumulating evidence points to the emerging role of axon guidance molecules in glioma progression .
Notably , many signaling events harnessed by guidance molecules to regulate cell migration and axon navigation during development are also found to be involved in the modulation of deregulated pathways in gliomas .
This paper focused on the signalings triggered by the guidance molecule semaphorins and their receptors plexins and neuropilins , and how their crosstalk with oncogenic pathways in gliomas might modulate cancer progression .
The emerging role of semaphorins and plexins as tumor suppressors or oncogenes is also discussed .
1 .
Introduction
Gliomas are the most common tumor in the central nervous system , with an incidence rate of 5 to 10 per 100,000 for the malignant form [ ] .
Based on their histological characteristics and expression of lineage markers , gliomas can be classified into astrocytoma , oligodendroglioma , and ependymoma [ ] .
Astrocytomas account for 60 % of all primary brain tumors and the World Health Organization ( WHO ) classification system grades them on a scale of I to IV according to their increasing degree of malignancy [ ] .
Among them , Grade IV is one of the most highly invasive types of tumor [ ] , characterized by microvascular proliferation .
Its aggressive infiltrative growth leads to an extremely high recurrence rate within a short period of time even after radical surgical resection .
Worse still , many glioblastomas are found to be resistant to chemo- or radiotherapy due to DNA repair by the protein O6-methylguanine-methyltransferase ( MGMT ) and impaired apoptotic pathways .
Median survival after initial diagnosis is therefore currently only around 12 to 18 months [ ] .
This apparently calls for a more thorough understanding of the pathoetiology at both cellular and molecular level to provide insight into the devise of novel and effective therapeutic treatments .
This paper revisits the biological features of various genetic pathways deregulated in human gliomas , followed by an overview of the involvement of semaphorins and their receptors in these signalings that lead to their emerging role in the regulation of gliomagenesis .
2 .
Classification of Astrocytomas
Astrocytomas can be categorized into localized and diffuse forms .
Localized astrocytic tumors exhibit a circumscribed growth pattern with limited capacity for parenchymal infiltration .
Pilocytic astrocytomas for instance , are slow growing tumors that occur primarily in children or young adults [ ] .
They are mostly nonaggressive and show little or no tendency to undergo anaplastic malignant transformation .
This type of astrocytic tumor is classified as WHO grade I and is often curable if the tumor is resectable .
Histologically , Rosenthal fibers are often observed on tumor sections .
By contrast , diffuse astrocytomas are characterized by their high infiltration into peritumoral regions and dispersal to distant sites .
Based on the WHO classification , they are subdivided into low-grade astrocytoma ( grade II ) , anaplastic astrocytoma ( grade III ) , and glioblastoma multiforme ( GBM ) .
Low-grade diffuse astrocytoma is characterized by slow growth and infiltration of neighboring brain structures [ ] .
Histologically , the tumors are characterized by low to moderate cellularity .
Cancer cells are well differentiated and show resemblance to astrocytes with little nuclear atypia .
Also known as fibrillary astrocytomas , these cancers are believed to arise from neoplastic astrocytes .
In fact , the cancer cells produce cytoplasmic processes that form a rich fibrillary stroma around the neoplasm , hence giving rise to a diffuse outline of the tumor in scans .
These grade II tumors typically affect young adults ( age of 25-50 ) and are treatable , with a mean survival of 6 years after surgical intervention .
Nonetheless , the prognosis varies because of the tendency for these tumors to undergo malignant transformation to higher grades .
Anaplastic astrocytoma is highly proliferative and infiltrative .
It is not uncommon that cells of these grade III malignant tumors invade along the white matter tracts and give rise to a classic " butterfly " pattern of spread at the corpus callosum .
While histological characteristics of astrocytes can still be observed , the tumor cells become more pleomorphic with distinct nuclear atypia .
They show increased mitotic activity and cellularity .
Notably , anaplastic astrocytoma may develop de novo as primary tumor or arise from a grade II diffuse astrocytoma as secondary tumor .
Afflicted patients are usually around the age of 40 .
Treatment regimens include surgical resection , radiation , and chemotherapy .
Owing to the high invasiveness and aggressiveness , however , high recurrence rate is often observed within 2 years , during which the cancer typically would have progressed to high-grade glioblastoma .
GBM is the most invasive and malignant form of diffuse astrocytomas , and is one of the most aggressive type of human neoplasms .
Histologically , the cancer cells are anaplastic and poorly differentiated .
The pleomorphic astrocytic tumor cells show marked nuclear atypia and high mitotic activity .
Rapid proliferation of the malignant cancer cells is accompanied by microvascular proliferation , though hypoxia is often resulted , leading to necrosis in the tumor core .
In fact , neovascularization and necrotic cell death are the two major histopathological hallmarks for the diagnosis of glioblastomas versus anaplastic astrocytomas .
Glioblastomas can be subdivided into primary or secondary form .
Primary GBMs account for 60 % of cases in adults above 45 years old .
These tumors arise de novo with no sign of a preexisting less malignant precursor lesion .
In contrast , secondary GBMs typically develop in patients below the age of 45 through malignant progression from lower grade diffuse astrocytoma or anaplastic astrocytoma in a span of one to ten years .
At molecular level , the genetic lesions in primary and secondary GBMs also differ .
Glioblastoma occurs most frequently in the cerebral hemisphere of adults between the ages of 45 and 70 .
Owing to the wide infiltration of glioblastoma cells , it is impossible to eradicate them by surgical means .
In addition to their resistance to radio- and chemotherapy , recurrence rate of GBMs is close to 100 % .
A median survival of approximately one year is therefore commonly seen in the afflicted patients despite aggressive multimodality treatment regimens .
3 .
Genetic Pathways Deregulated in Glioblastomas
Although lower-grade gliomas ( II and III ) can undergo malignant progression to become secondary glioblastoma , most GBMs are diagnosed as de novo primary glioblastoma without sign of antecedent lower-grade tumor .
Primary GBMs typically show gene amplification and mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , deletion or loss-of-function mutations of the phosphatase and tensin homolog ( PTEN ) at chromosome 10 , and less frequently gene amplification of the p53 inhibitor human double minute 2 ( HDM2 ) .
Deregulation of these pathways is believed to contribute to the self sustained proliferation , resistance to apoptosis , and highly invasive features of glioblastoma .
3.1 .
Hyperactivation of the EGFR-PI3K-AKT Pathway
The EGFR gene is located on 7p12 .1 , which encodes a cell membrane receptor of the ErbB family .
Upon activation by its ligands EGF or TGFalpha , EGFR undergo homodimerization to stimulate its intrinsic intracellular protein-tyrosine kinase activity .
This triggers the downstream signaling cascades PI3K-AKT-GSK3beta-Rac1 and the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK ( ) [ ] , which controls important functions such as cell survival , proliferation , and motility .
Deregulation of EGFR , mostly in the form of gene amplification or overexpression is commonly found in primary GBMs [ ] .
The majority of GBMs with EGFR amplification also express the variant EGFRvIII [ ] , a mutant generated from an in-frame deletion of exons 2 to 7 that results in truncation of the extracellular domain .
EGFRvIII is unresponsive to EGF stimulation but exhibits ligand independent constitutive activity [ ] .
These genetic aberrations of EGFR cause activation of PI3K and AKT signalings , which promote glioma cell proliferation and tumorigenicity via p27 [ ] .
AKT can also phosphorylate and inhibit GSK3beta , thereby diminishing proteasomal degradation of cyclin D1 and hence promoting cell cycle progression [ ] .
Notably , the levels of phospho-PI3K and phospho-AKT are inversely associated with that of cleaved caspase 3 , suggesting the association of activated PI3K pathway with reduced level of apoptosis commonly observed in GBMs .
This partly accounts for the resistance of glioblastomas to radiotherapy .
Ironically , there is evidence that shows activation of EGFRvIII by radiation , posing a concern in prescribing radiotherapy as a treatment regimen in the management of glioblastomas [ ] .
Furthermore , PI3K and AKT and PKB can activate Rac1 [ ] , which in turn triggers TIMP2 , MMP2 , and MMP9 pathway to promote cell invasion [ ] .
3.2 .
Hyperactivation of the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK Pathway Causes High Proliferation and Resistance to Apoptosis in Glioblastomas
In addition to PI3K signaling , activated EGFR also triggers the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathway .
In fact , several growth factor pathways that are aberrantly activated in glioblastomas , including platelet derived growth factor ( PDGF ) , insulin like growth factor-1 ( IGF-1 ) , hepatocyte growth factor and scatter factor ( HGF and SF ) , vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) , and transforming growth factor-beta ( TGF-beta ) also converge to Ras activation .
High level of activated Ras is always found in glioma cell lines and glioblastoma biopsies [ ] .
This is in contrast to many other cancer types where Ras is abnormally activated by oncogenic mutations .
Active Ras recruits Raf kinase to the membrane , where it is primed by phosphorylation .
Raf in turn activates MEK and ERK .
Activated ERK then translocates into the nucleus to activate various transcription factors to induce cell cycle progression and antiapoptotic signalings [ ] .
Importantly , blockade of Ras activation in gliomas slows down cancer cell proliferation .
Application of Ras inhibitor also reduces migration of U87-MG gliomas cells [ ] .
The deregulation of signalings in gliomas is further complicated by intensive cross-talk between the Ras and the PI3K pathways .
Ras is known to stimulate PI3K through physical association , which activates PI3K mediated antiapoptotic processes and hence contributes to Ras oncogenicity [ ] .
Conversely , PI3K was proposed to participate in ERK1 and 2 activation [ ] .
In summary , aberrant activation of specific receptor tyrosine kinases in gliomas elicits both the Ras and the PI3K cascades , leading to promotion of cancer cell proliferation , survival , motility , and resistance to apoptosis .
3.3 .
Loss of PTEN Functions Is Associated with Glioblastomas
Located at 10q23 .3 , the PTEN gene encodes a protein that contains a tensin like domain and a catalytic domain at the N-terminus similar to that of the dual-specificity protein tyrosine phosphatases .
Interestingly , it was found that the phosphatase activity of PTEN exhibits substrate preference towards phosphoinositide such as phosphatidylinositol ( 3,4,5 ) - trisphosphate ( PIP 3 ) [ ] .
PIP 3 is an important lipid product of PI3K that serves as second messenger for the activation of AKT and PKB , which promotes cell proliferation and survival through the inhibition of apoptotic cell death .
The lipid phosphatase activity of PTEN in dephosphorylating PIP 3 into PIP 2 therefore serves as a negative regulator of PI3K signalings .
In addition to cell proliferation and apoptosis , PTEN is also involved in the regulation of glioma cell motility .
The central domain of PTEN shows protein tyrosine phosphatase activity , which directly dephosphorylates focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) in integrin complex , hence inhibiting integrin mediated migration and invasion [ - ] .
Furthermore , PTEN was found to directly dephosphorylate the SH2 containing adaptor protein ( Shc ) upstream of Ras , hence downregulating the Ras/Raf/MEK / ERK pathway and inhibits cell spreading , migration , and invasion [ ] .
Taken together , PTEN modulates the integrin-FAK and the Shc-Ras-MAPK pathways , thereby regulating both random and directional cell motility in glioma cells , respectively [ ] .
Notably , a majority of primary glioblastoma and established glioma cell lines such as U87-MG and U373-MG carry mutations in the PTEN gene that result in diminished or null expression of the protein , leading to aberrant activation of AKT [ ] , FAK [ - ] , and Ras in GBMs .
In fact , loss of heterozygosity ( LOH ) 10q is one of the most common genetic aberrations in GBMs .
A complete loss of the entire chromosome 10 , where the PTEN gene resides is typical for primary glioblastomas .
The loss of PTEN check on PIP 3 and AKT and PKB signaling pathway in glioma therefore spares the cells from apoptosis and promote cell cycle progression .
Deregulation of PTEN functions could also render EGFR kinase-inhibitor therapy ineffective because of the dissociation of EGFR inhibition from downstream PI3K pathway inhibition .
Conceivably , a compromise of PTEN functions in counteracting FAK and Ras signalings contributes to the high basal cell motility and the progression of glioblastoma .
3.4 .
pRB Pathway
The retinoblastoma protein ( pRB ) is encoded by the RB1 gene located at 13q14 .1 .
pRB is a tumor suppressor protein that blocks cell cycle progression through G1 into S-phase , hence preventing cells from replicating damaged DNA .
Mechanistically , pRb forms complexes with transcription factors of the E2F family and suppresses the coordinated transcription of genes necessary for DNA synthesis [ ] .
The pRb and E2F complex also attracts histone deacetylase ( HDAC ) protein to the chromatin , reducing transcription of S phase promoting factors , further suppressing DNA synthesis .
The cell cycle arrest function of pRB is counteracted upon phosphorylation by the cyclin dependent kinases Cdk4 and Cdk6 , which form complexes with cyclin D1 , leading to a release of E2F and hence derepression of cell cycle progression .
Under physiological conditions , the Cdk4 and cyclin-D 1 activity is checked by CDKN2A ( p16 INK4a ) protein to prevent aberrant cell proliferation .
In cancer states , however , an upregulation of cyclin D1 and Cdk4 , or an inactivation of CDKN2A is often seen , leading to uncontrolled cell proliferation .
In fact , the pRB pathway is commonly inactivated in both primary and secondary glioblastomas .
Genetic loss or promoter methylation of RB1 , homozygous deletion of CDKN2A , or amplification of CDK4 frequently occurs in GBMs .
These deregulations contribute to uncontrolled cell cycle progression and tumorigenesis .
4 .
Involvement of Axon Guidance Molecules in Glioma Progression
In addition to deregulation of the classical growth factor receptors and signaling pathways , increasing evidence suggests the involvement of novel players in the progression of gliomas .
Diffused gliomas are known to be highly infiltrative into the surrounding parenchyma of tumor mass even at low-grade .
This poses an immense challenge to clinical management of the disease and high recurrence rate is commonly observed even after radical surgical resection of the tumor .
Notably , clinical observations revealed a preferential invasion of gliomas along white matter tracts such as the corpus callosum [ ] .
Furthermore , cessation of glioma cell migration is often observed at the junction between the white and the grey matter .
These findings suggest the presence of tropic and guidance cues for the invasion of gliomas within the CNS .
In fact , accumulating evidence suggests the involvement of axon guidance molecules such as netrin [ ] , Slit [ ] , and semaphorins [ ] in glioma progression .
A recent study has demonstrated that netrin functions to inhibit glioma cell motility in an autocrine fashion [ ] .
A loss of expression of DCC ( Deleted in Colorectal Carcinoma ) , the receptor for netrin has been found to correlate with glioma progression [ ] .
Similarly , Slit 2 inhibits glioma cell invasion in a Robo dependent manner , and its expression is epigenetically downregulated in gliomas [ ] .
Semaphorins are amongst the largest family of guidance molecules that trigger both repulsive and attractive axon guidance functions through different receptors and coreceptors .
Growing body of evidence indicates that semaphorins also subserve pro-tumorigenic and tumor suppressor roles in various cancer types , including gliomas [ - ] .
4.1 .
Semaphorins and Their Receptors Neuropilins and Plexins
Semaphorins , originally identified as guidance cues that navigate axons in the nervous system , fall into eight subclasses of secreted , membrane glycosylphosphatidyl-inositol ( GPI ) - anchored , and transmembrane proteins ( ) .
Semaphorins are characterized by the presence of a sema domain and a PSI ( plexins , semaphorins and integrins ) domain at the N-terminus , which are also present in their receptors plexins [ ] .
Most family members harbor the immunoglobulin ( Ig ) - like domain , which is a signature feature found in the Ig superfamily ( IgSF ) of cell adhesion or recognition molecules .
Class 5 semaphorins are distinctive due to the presence of multiple thrombospondin 1 ( TSP1 ) domains , which has been implicated in platelet aggregation , angiogenesis , and tumorigenesis [ ] .
To date , class 3 semaphorins are the most thoroughly studied for their physiological and pathological functions .
Interestingly , members of this class exist in secreted form and interact directly with the receptors neuropilin ( Nrp ) -1 or -2 , which have small intracellular tail and need to engage plexins as coreceptors for signal transduction functions .
Mammalian plexins are classified into four subfamilies plexin-A to -D [ ] , which share high homology in structural domains such as the sema domain and the cysteine rich motifs related to c-Met proto-oncogene .
Despite this , interactions between different subfamilies of plexins and semaphorins still show differential specificity , which trigger different sets of biological functions ( ) .
A second level of functional specificity is attained by the coupling of plexins with various coreceptors expressed in a cell- or tissue specific manner , such as neuropilins , L1 adhesion molecule , off-track ( Otk ) , c-Met proto-oncogene , the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2 , CD72 , and Tim-2 [ - ] .
These lead to the implication of semaphorins and plexins in a vast array of biological processes beyond axon guidance , such as cell adhesion , cell motility , angiogenesis , immune responses , organogenesis , and tumorigenesis .
4.2 .
Semaphorins and Their Receptors in Tumorigenesis
The implication of semaphorins in cancer development was first suggested by the observation of a deletion of chromosomal region 3p21 , where Sema3B and Sema3F reside , in almost all cases of small cell lung cancer ( SCLC ) [ - ] .
Ensuing research revealed that many class 3 semaphorins exhibit tumor suppressor function by inhibiting proliferation and promoting apoptotic cell death in cancer cells .
Sema3B , for instance induces apoptosis in lung and breast cancer , whereas Sema3F shows antiproliferative and antiangiogenic functions in melanoma , lung , breast , and colorectal cancers .
In addition , Sema3A and 3F were shown to inhibit cell migration of breast carcinoma and metastasis of melanoma , respectively , through their receptors neuropilins and plexins in an autocrine or paracrine manner .
Sema3A and Nrp -1 and Sema3F and Nrp -2 interactions also block endothelial cell migration and initiate antiangiogenic signaling cascades [ ] .
While Sema3A , 3B , and 3F demonstrate antitumorigenic or antiangiogenic properties in various cancer types , other members are implicated in the promotion of tumor progression .
Overexpression of Sema3C in prostate cancer cell lines promotes cell invasion [ ] .
An upregulation of Sema3E transcript has been observed in metastatic human lung adenocarcinoma cells [ ] .
Expression of Sema3E induces lung metastasis of mammary adenocarcinoma and promotes migration and growth of endothelial cells [ ] .
While the importance of semaphorins in cancer development is most well characterized in secreted class 3 members , transmembrane semaphorins of class 4 , 5 , and 6 begin to emerge as important players .
Sema4D is highly expressed in cell lines derived from head and neck squamous cell carcinomas ( HNSCCs ) .
When shed from HNSCC cells , Sema4D stimulates endothelial cell migration .
Silencing Sema4D expression by lentiviral shRNA dramatically reduces the size and vascularity of HNSCC tumor xenografts [ ] .
These findings suggest the angiogenic function of Sema4D .
An overexpression of Sema4D was found to be significantly correlated with lymph node and distant metastasis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma .
In vitro experiments revealed that stimulation of pancreatic cancer cells with Sema4D triggers its receptor plexin-B1 and leads to the promotion of invasiveness through activation of the MAPK and the AKT pathway [ ] .
In prostate cancers , a significant upregulation of both Sema4D and plexin-B1 has been observed [ ] .
Mutations have also been found in plexin-B1 that causes an impairment of its R-RasGAP activity , hence increasing cell motility and invasion .
In contrast to these oncogenic roles of Sema4D , however , various lines of evidence point to a tumor suppressor role of its receptor plexin-B1 .
For instance , a loss of plexin-B1 expression is associated with poor prognosis in ER+ breast cancer patients [ ] .
Plexin-B1 downregulation is also seen in renal cell carcinoma [ ] .
Tumor suppressor function of plexin-B1 has been demonstrated in melanoma cells , and its expression is downregulated by oncogenic B-Raf signaling via MEK and ERK pathway [ ] .
Divergent functions in cancer development is also implicated in class 6 semaphorins .
Sema6A inhibits both bFGF and VEGF and tumor cell line induced neovascularization [ ] , whereas an upregulation of Sema6D expression is associated with the development of gastric carcinoma [ ] .
A recent study has revealed the role of Sema7A in inhibiting cancer cell invasion by inactivation of cofilin through plexin-C1 , which is consistent with the observation of a downregulation of Sema7A in metastatic melanoma cells [ ] .
Among other members , class 5 semaphorins are peculiar due to the presence of thrombospondin repeats in the extracellular domain , which have been implicated in cancer cell motility and proliferation [ ] .
The expression of semaphorin 5A ( Sema5A ) and its receptor plexin-B3 was shown to be associated with the aggressive nature of pancreatic , prostate , and gastric cancers [ - ] .
Nonetheless , a recent report has demonstrated significant downregulation of Sema5A transcript and protein in nonsmall cell lung carcinoma , which correlates with poor survival of the patients , suggesting potential anticancer effect of Sema5A [ ] .
Consistent with this is a recent study that reports the presence a novel missense mutation in plexin-B3 in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas , which prevents interaction with its ligand Sema5A , hence impairing their signaling and contributing to tumor progression [ ] .
4.3 .
Semaphorins and Their Receptors in Gliomagenesis
The implication of semaphorins , neuropilins , and plexins in gliomagenesis was suggested by their presence in human glioma cells [ ] .
In particular , the downregulation of Sema6B expression in two human glioblastoma cell lines when treated with retinoic acid , an antitumor and differentiation inducing agent suggest its involvement in tumor formation [ ] .
To date , class 3 semaphorins remain the most well characterized subfamily in the development of gliomas .
An increase in expression of the Sema3B gene was found to be associated with poor prognosis and survival of glioma patients [ ] .
Yet a later study reported the opposite by demonstrating positive correlations of Sema3B , Sema3G and neuropilin-2 with prolonged survival in glioma patients [ ] .
Similarly , a protumorigenic role of Sema3A was implicated by its overexpression in human GBM specimens , which acts in an autocrine fashion to promote glioma cell dispersal through neuropilin-1 .
Silencing Sema3A expression by RNA interference resulted in a significant suppression in migration and an alteration in glioma cell morphology in a Rac1 dependent manner [ ] .
Nonetheless , it should be noted that Sema3A exhibits an antiangiogenic effect in meningiomas , as evident by the correlation of its high expression with reduced tumor vascularization .
Recurrence of meniginomas is often associated with a decline in Sema3A expression [ ] .
In contrast to Sema3A , in vitro data revealed that Sema3F inhibits glioma cell migration via RhoA inactivation by p190 RhoGAP [ ] .
Frequent deletion of 3p21 in gliomas , where the Sema3F gene resides could abolish its effect in counteracting tumor cell motility .
In a related study , low level of Sema3F expression was observed in highly metastatic human tumor cell lines due to Id2 mediated repression of gene transcription , which possibly accounts for the enhancement of tumor cell migration and invasion [ ] .
Similarly , an overexpression of or an exogenous stimulation by Sema3G in human U251 glioma cells is sufficient to inhibit migration and invasion , suggesting a cell autonomous or paracrine mechanism [ ] .
Recently , Sema5A has been shown to suppress human glioma cell migration and invasion in a plexin-B3- and Rac1 dependent manner [ ] .
A downregulation of Sema5A protein is found from low- to high-grade gliomas .
Notably , stimulation of human glioblastoma cells with Sema5A promotes their differentiation from anaplastic to astrocytic morphology , which is reminiscent of the less pleomorphic and well differentiated features associated with low-grade astrocytomas .
Taken together , these findings suggest a tumor suppressor role of Sema5A , which is compromised towards high-grade glioblastomas [ ] .
In addition to semaphorins , there has been evidence pointing to the importance of neuropilins in glioma development .
Analyses of human glioma specimens revealed a significant correlation of Nrp-1 expression with glioma progression to high grades .
An upregulation of Nrp-1 in glioma cells was found to promote tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo .
These effects are mediated through the promotion of c-Met phosphorylation , hence potentiating the autocrine HGF and c-Met signaling pathway [ ] .
5 .
Semaphorin and Plexin Signalings
Semaphorins and their receptors are inarguably involved in the progression of a large number of cancer types , with functions ranging from cell migration , invasion , metastasis , proliferation , and apoptosis , to angiogenesis .
It is not uncommon that many semaphorins can induce pro- and antitumorigenic effects in different cancers , making it a challenging task to decipher the underlying mechanisms of these activities .
For instance , Sema3B induces apoptosis in lung and breast cancer but is associated with poor prognosis and survival of glioma patients [ ] .
Sema3A promotes glioblastoma cell dispersal but inhibits angiogenesis in meningiomas .
Possible reasons for these diversities could be attributable to cross-interactions between different subfamilies of semaphorins and plexins , which show differential binding affinity and specificity , thereby triggering different sets of signaling events and functions .
A second level of regulation is attained by coupling plexins and and or neuropilins to various coreceptors expressed in a cell- or tissue specific manner , such as neuropilins , L1-cell adhesion molecule , c-Met proto-oncogene , the receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2 , and PDGFR .
This could potentially elicit a more diverse network of signaling events .
5.1 .
Plexin-A Signaling Regulates PI3K Pathway
Sema3A signaling involves phosphorylation of plexin-As by nonreceptor tyrosine kinases Fes and Fps and Fyn .
Fyn , a member of the Src family of tyrosine kinases , associates with and phosphorylates plexin-A2 in response to Sema3A ( ) .
Active Fyn then phosphorylates cyclin dependent kinase-5 ( Cdk5 ) [ ] .
While activated Cdk5 is classically known to phosphorylate CRMP-2 ( collapse response mediator protein ) in neurons and leads to growth cone collapse , a recent report has shown that Cdk5 mediated phosphorylation of PIKE-A ( Isoform A of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase enhancer ) , a novel pro-oncogenic and antiapoptotic factor that activates AKT and promotes cancer cell growth , induces glioblastoma cell migration and invasion .
These signalings are consistent with the protumorigenic role of Sema3A in promoting glioma cell dispersal [ ] .
Interestingly , a recent report has provided in vivo evidence that hyperactivated EGFR signaling in glioblastoma patients also recruits Fyn kinase to enhance tumor survival , growth and invasion [ ] .
5.2 .
Plexin-B Signaling Regulates RhoGTPases
Stimulation of plexin-B1 with Sema4D has been shown to recruit active Rac1 to the Cdc42 and Rac interactive binding ( CRIB ) domain in the cytoplasmic tail [ ] .
This leads to sequestration of Rac1-GTP from its downstream effector p21 activated kinase ( PAK ) , hence suppressing Rac1 mediated functions such as cell migration and proliferation .
A recent report that investigates the significance of Sema5A and plexin-B3 in glioma has also shown their suppression of Rac1 activation , though through a different mechanism .
Sema5A stimulation of plexin-B3 promotes the recruitment of Rac1 to Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor ( RhoGDI ) alpha , which is a negative modulator that sequesters small GTPases and shuttles them from membrane to the cytosol to prevent activation ( ) .
The inactivation of Rac1 was confirmed to contribute to Sema5A induced impediment of glioma cell migration and invasion , as evident by the abolishment of effect upon forced expression of a constitutively active Rac1 mutant [ ] .
In addition to Rac1 , plexin-Bs are also involved in the regulation of RhoA activation .
Plexin-B members are peculiar to feature a PDZ domain binding motif at their carboxyl terminus .
A number of studies have demonstrated direct interaction of plexin-B1 with two PDZ domain containing Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( RhoGEF ) , namely , PDZ-RhoGEF and leukemia associated RhoGEF ( LARG ) [ - ] .
Stimulation of plexin-B1 by Sema4D leads to RhoA activation in a PDZ-RhoGEF and LARG dependent manner , causing remodeling of actin cytoskeleton that is important for the regulation of cell morphology and cell motility .
Notably , Sema4D is known to activate the MAPK pathway , which is dependent on the C-terminus of plexin-B1 and LARG mediated activation of RhoA [ ] .
In fact , RhoA-GTP was formerly shown to signal to Raf to activate MAPK cascade [ ] .
Taken together , this provides a link between the signalings mediated by Sema4D and MAPK .
However , it should be emphasized that the activation of RhoA through PDZ-RhoGEF represents a specific mode restricted to members of the plexin-B subfamily due to the exclusive presence of PDZ domain binding motif in their C-terminus .
On the other hand , there is also opposing evidence that indicates the role of Sema4D in RhoA inactivation instead .
Stimulation of plexin-B1 with Sema4D was found to promote the binding of plexin-B1 with p190-RhoGAP , which inactivates RhoA and leads to disassembly of focal adhesions [ ] .
Interestingly , the GAP activity of p190-RhoGAP is enhanced by direct interaction with the constitutively active small GTPase Rnd1 [ ] , which also binds to the intracellular domain of plexin-B1 [ ] .
It remains to be determined whether plexin-B1 serves as a docking site to facilitate p190-RhoGAP activation by Rnd1 or instead functions as a negative regulator by sequestering Rnd1 from p190RhoGAP .
5.3 .
Plexin Singaling Regulates Ras Activity
Sequence analysis of plexins revealed the presence of weakly conserved RasGAP motifs in the cytoplasmic domain .
A closer examination revealed two subdomains C1 and C2 which harbor the primary arginine ( Arg ) finger and the secondary Arg and Lys motif , respectively , which are highly conserved in the catalytic domain of GAPs and are essential for promoting the GTP hydrolytic activity of target GTPases .
The intervening region between C1 and C2 encompasses the binding site for active Rac1 and constitutively active Rnd1 .
In basal state , C1 and C2 domains in plexin-B1 undergo intramolecular interaction that prevents their association with Ras .
Rnd1 binding to the linker region relieves the closed conformation and allows the plexin-B1-Rnd1 complex to interact with R-Ras .
However , RasGAP activity is not triggered until Sema4D binds to Rnd-1-bound plexin-B1 , which causes dimerization of the receptor .
The inactivation of R-Ras by GAP activity of plexin-B1 contributes to the inhibition of neurite outgrowth and growth cone collapse in hippocampal neurons by Sema4D .
Notably , this GAP domain is conserved throughout all plexin families and has been shown to mediate repulsion of axon outgrowth induced by Sema3A and plexin-A1 as well [ ] .
In contrast to other Ras family members that are commonly deregulated in gliomas , R-Ras only weakly activates Raf and the MEK and ERK pathway .
Instead , R-Ras stimulates PI3K and AKT with an efficiency comparable to that of Ras ( ) .
R-Ras has been shown to promote breast carcinoma cell migration and invasion in a PI3K- and integrin dependent manner [ ] .
Inactivation of R-Ras by the RasGAP activity of plexin-B1 triggered by Sema4D was shown to cause an inhibition of cell migration through suppression of PI3K and beta1 integrin activity [ ] .
Recently , there has been evidence to show that the inactivation of R-Ras by Sema4D induced RasGAP activity of plexin-B1 leads to PTEN dephosphorylation , thereby activating its inhibitory effect on PI3K signaling [ ] .
This provides a plausible mechanism by which plexin-Bs regulates the PI3K and AKT pathway .
While the importance of R-Ras activity regulation by semaphorin and plexin in glioma progression is yet to be scrutinized , increasing R-Ras expression and activation is known to correlate with advanced grades of gliomas and invading glioblastoma cells [ ] .
In addition to R-Ras , Sema4D and plexin-B1 can also suppress M-Ras activity , which results in an inhibition of dendritic outgrowth and branching in primary cortical neurons [ ] .
Remarkably , this signaling was found to induce a suppression of ERK activity , though the mechanism remains known .
It is notable that a recent study has reported Rap1 as a novel substrate for the GAP activity mediated by plexin-B1 .
Rap1 overexpression was observed in astrocytomas of all malignancy grades , and was 2 to 3 folds higher in grade IV GBMs than in lower grades or non neoplastic brain [ ] .
The effect of GAP activity of plexin-B on Rap1 in the control of glioma progression , if any , warrants further investigations .
6 .
Coupling of Plexin-B with c-Met and ErbB2 as Coreceptors
c-Met is a tyrosine kinase receptor that upon stimulation by hepatocyte growth factor and scatter factor ( HGF and SF ) regulates various cellular functions such as cell proliferation , migration , invasion , and morphogenesis through activation of various signalings such as the Ras and the PI3K and AKT pathways .
They are commonly overexpressed in gliomas and contribute to enhanced tumorigenicity [ ] .
An inhibition of endogenous HGF and SF and c-Met in gliomas suppresses the malignant phenotype .
To date , all known members of plexin-B subfamily have been shown to interact with c-Met and the related proto-oncogene Ron , even in the absence of their ligands .
Binding of Sema4D to plexin-B1 stimulates the tyrosine kinase activity of c-Met and Ron , resulting in tyrosine phosphorylation of both receptors and promotion of invasive response in a liver progenitor cell line and a colon carcinoma cell line .
By contrast , a recent study has reported the opposite in melanoma .
Sema4D fails to activate c-Met in melanomas , not because of a significant downregulation of plexin-B1 in these cancer cells .
Instead , reconstitution of plexin-B1 expression in melanomas inhibits HGF dependent activation of c-Met and migration [ ] .
A plausible explanation for this observation could be the competition between plexin-B1 and HGF for c-Met binding .
Importantly , restoring plexin-B1 expression in melanoma cells is sufficient to suppress tumor growth in vivo , suggesting a tumor suppressor role of plexin-B1 [ ] .
In fact , the contrasting effects of semaphorins and plexins in regulating HGF and c-Met signaling is not unexpected given the ability of plexins to modulate Ras and PI3K as described above ( ) .
In addition to c-Met , members of the plexin-B family were also found to stably associate with another receptor tyrosine kinase ErbB2 .
Binding of Sema4D to plexin-B1 stimulates the intrinsic tyrosine kinase activity of ErbB2 , resulting in the phosphorylation of both receptors [ ] .
ErbB2 mediated phosphorylation of plexin-B1 is important for Sema4D induced activation of RhoA through PDZ-RhoGEF [ ] .
Contrary to this , Sema4D induces an inactivation of RhoA in a c-Met dependent manner [ ] .
The reciprocal effect of c-Met and ErbB2 in plexin-B1-mediated regulation of RhoA activation status is believed to partially account for the pro- and antimigratory effects of Sema4D in breast carcinoma and other cancer cells , depending on the relative expression levels of these two receptors [ ] .
Notably , analysis of astrocytomas of different grades shows no gene amplification of ErbB2 .
The expression of ErbB2 protein is weaker than EGFR and is at barely detectable level by Western and immunocytochemistry analysis [ ] .
The relative importance of c-Met and ErbB2 in the regulation of glioma behaviors by semaphorin and plexin signaling remains to be determined .
7 .
Regulation of Semaphorins and Plexins by Oncogenic Pathways
While semaphorins and plexins impose their pro- and antitumorigenic functions in gliomas through the regulation of various signaling pathways , accumulating evidence suggests that they are also targets for modulation by some of the aberrant oncogenic pathways .
The gene encoding for Sema3B for instance , was identified as a direct target of the tumor suppressor gene p53 that is commonly mutated in gliomas [ ] .
Ectopic expression of p53 in a p53 deficient glioblastoma cell line results in dramatic induction of Sema3B mRNA expression and a reduction in the number of colonies in anchorage independent growth assays .
These findings suggest that Sema3B mediates the tumor suppressor functions of p53 , which is often diminished in gliomas [ ] .
Hyperactivation of Ras and its downstream signaling cascades is another commonly observed genetic lesion in different cancers including gliomas .
Oncogenic mutations of B-Raf , one of the effectors of Ras is prevalent in melanomas and other cancers but is rarely detected in gliomas , which when present are mainly restricted to high-grade malignant glioblastomas [ ] .
In gliomas , gain in copy number is more common than mutations for Ras and Raf [ ] , though both forms of deregulation lead to activation of the MEK and ERK pathway .
Interestingly , constitutive B-Raf/MEK/ERK signaling was found to be associated with a downregulation of plexin-B1 transcript in melanoma [ ] .
Restoring plexin-B1 expression in melanoma cells is sufficient to suppress anchorage independent growth in vitro and inhibit tumor growth in xenograft transplants in nude mice .
The antitumorigenic effect of plexin-B1 is dependent on its R-RasGAP activity and is associated with AKT inactivation [ ] .
While R-Ras is less oncogenic than other Ras , its deregulation in gliomas is known to promote migration and invasion behaviors [ ] .
It is plausible that the antitumorigenic functions of plexin-B1 observed in melanoma are adopted in gliomas as well .
8 .
Concluding Remarks
Gliomas are known to exhibit not only histological heterogeneity but also variations in genetic alterations both inter- and intratumorally [ ] .
These have led to the proposition to incorporate molecular signature to classical histopathological diagnosis so as to provide a more informative description of the features of different glioma types .
Here , an overview of various signaling pathways commonly deregulated in gliomas was presented .
Despite our increasing knowledge of how these oncogenic pathways interact in a complex manner to contribute to aberrant cell proliferation , resistance to apoptotic cell death , enhanced migration and invasion , and induction of angiogenesis in glioma cells , the options of clinical treatment are still currently largely limited to a combination of surgical resection , followed by radiotherapy or chemotherapy using nonspecific alkylating agents such as temozolomide .
While a number of inhibitors and antibodies that suppress the activities of deregulated kinases such as EGFR , c-MET , PDGFR , and PI3K are currently in difference phases of preclinical characterizations or clinical trials , the outcomes show great variations and are complicated by toxicity associated with the agents .
The emerging roles of semaphorins and their receptors in the regulation of gliomagenesis and progression therefore represent potential novel candidate targets .
Given the engagement of plexins with some of the oncogenic receptor tyrosine kinases such as c-Met and ErbB2 as coreceptors , a better understanding of the crosstalk between these signaling networks is required .
Supported by the recent success in detecting MGMT methylation level in glioblastoma patients to predict their sensitivity to chemoradiotherapy using alkylating agents , future direction in clinical management of gliomas , which are heterogeneous in nature , is to define the molecular and genetic profile of the tumor in individual patient so as to devise a customized regimen of treatments .
Figure 1
Semaphorins and their receptors .
Schematic diagram to illustrate the structural features of different classes of semaphorins , plexins and neuropilins .
Members of class 2 and 3 semaphorins are secreted , whereas semaphorins 1 , 4-6 are single-pass transmembrane proteins .
Class 7 semaphorin is membrane bound via a GPI-anchor .
All known semaphorins and plexins are characterized by the presence of a sema domain at the amino-terminus .
While semaphorins are structurally diverse , plexin members are well conserved and feature PSI and IPT domains in the extracellular moiety , and a split intracellular GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) domain .
Plexin-Bs are distinctive by the presence of a PDZ domain binding site at the C-terminus .
Neuropilins are transmembrane receptors that feature two complement binding ( CUB ) domains and FV and FVIII coagulating factor like domain , and a MAM domain in the extracellular portion .
Ig , immunoglobulin like ; TM , transmembrane domain ; CD , cytoplasmic domain .
Figure 2
Signaling cascades mediated by plexin-A and plexin-B , and their crosstalk with oncogenic pathways in gliomas .
Plexin-As serve as coreceptors for neuropilins to transduce signals of class 3 semaphorins .
Fyn is activated upon semaphorin stimulation , which phosphorylates cyclin dependent kinase-5 ( Cdk5 ) and in turn collapse response mediator protein ( CRMP ) .
Cdk5 also phosphorylates isoform A of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase enhancer ( PIKE-A ) , which is a pro-oncogenic and antiapoptotic factor that activates AKT and promotes glioma cell growth , migration , and invasion .
Stimulation of plexin-B with semaphorins causes recruitment of active Rac1 to the Cdc42 and Rac interactive binding ( CRIB ) domain in the cytoplasmic tail , leading to sequestration of Rac1-GTP from its effector p21 activated kinase ( PAK ) and suppression of its downstream signalings .
Stimulation of plexin-B also promotes the recruitment of Rac1 to Rho GDP dissociation inhibitor ( RhoGDI ) alpha , which sequesters Rac1 and shuttles it from the membrane to the cytosol to prevent activation .
The PDZ domain binding motif at the C-terminus of plexin-B interacts with PDZ domain containing Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factors ( PDZ-RhoGEF ) , which promotes RhoA activation .
RhoA-GTP can signal to Raf and activate the MAPK pathway .
The GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) domain in the cytoplasmic tail of plexin-A and -B is activated upon semaphorin stimulation and Rnd1 binding , leading to inactivation of R-Ras and PI3K signaling but derepression of PTEN activities .
