Semaphorin 4D and Plexin-B 1 mediated R-Ras GAP activity inhibits cell migration by regulating beta 1 integrin activity
Plexins are cell surface receptors for semaphorins and regulate cell migration in many cell types .
We recently reported that the semaphorin 4D ( Sema4D ) receptor Plexin-B1 functions as a GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) for R-Ras , a member of Ras family GTPases implicated in regulation of integrin activity and cell migration ( Oinuma , I. , Y. Ishikawa , H. Katoh , and M. Negishi .
2004 .
Science .
305:862 -865 ) .
We characterized the role of R-Ras downstream of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 in cell migration .
Activation of Plexin-B1 by Sema4D suppressed the ECM dependent R-Ras activation , R-Ras-mediated phosphatydylinositol 3-kinase activation , and beta 1 integrin activation through its R-Ras GAP domain , leading to inhibition of cell migration .
In addition , inactivation of R-Ras by overexpression of the R-Ras-specific GAP or knockdown of R-Ras by RNA interference was sufficient for suppressing beta 1 integrin activation and cell migration in response to the ECM stimulation .
Thus , we conclude that R-Ras activity is critical for ECM mediated beta 1 integrin activation and cell migration and that inactivation of R-Ras by Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 mediated R-Ras GAP activity controls cell migration by modulating the activity of beta 1 integrins .
Introduction
Semaphorins comprise a large family of secreted and transmembrane molecules that play central roles in axon guidance in the developing nervous system .
The function of semaphorins is mediated by plexins , which are classified into four subfamilies : Plexin-A , -B , -C , and -D ( ) .
Semaphorins were originally identified as repulsive axonal guidance molecules , but they have recently been shown to regulate integrin mediated cell migration in a variety of cells ( ) .
Sema3A exerts an essential permissive role in the execution of vasculature remodeling by inhibiting integrin mediated adhesion of endothelial cells to the ECM ( ) .
Activation of Plexin-B1 negatively regulates integrin based cell adhesion and migration of NIH-3T3 cells ( ) .
Plexin-C1 inhibits integrin mediated adhesion and chemokine induced migration of dendritic cells ( ) .
Thus , semaphorin and plexin signaling plays an important role in the migration of a variety of cells .
However , the molecular mechanisms underlying the inhibition of integrin mediated cell migration by semaphorins through plexins remain unclear .
Rho family small GTPases are signal transduction molecules that remodel the actin cytoskeleton and play fundamental roles in numerous cellular processes ( ) .
The small GTPase Rnd1 , a constitutively active GTPase ( ) , is known to interact directly with the cytoplasmic domain of Plexin-B1 ( ) .
We recently revealed that Plexin-B1 functions as an R-Ras GTPase activating protein ( GAP ) and directly and specifically down-regulates R-Ras activity in response to Sema4D , inducing repulsive response in hippocampal neurons , and that the expression of R-Ras GAP activity of Plexin-B1 requires Rnd1 association with the receptor ( ) .
Furthermore , expression of constitutively active R-Ras prevents growth cone collapse induced by Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 as well as Sema3A and Plexin-A 1 , whereas R-Ras siRNA caused a growth cone collapse similar to those induced by semaphorins ( ) .
Integrins are a family of alpha and beta heterodimeric cell surface receptors that bind to the ECM , such as collagens and fibronectins , and play a central part in regulating cell growth , survival , migration , and tumor metastasis ( ) .
Activation of integrins is essential for cell adhesion and cell migration , and several studies show that the Ras family of small GTPases regulates integrin activity ( ) .
Among the Ras family GTPases , activated R-Ras was shown to induce integrin activation and increase cell adhesion and matrix assembly , suggesting that R-Ras plays an important role in the regulation of integrin activity .
However , how R-Ras activity is regulated and how R-Ras activates integrins remain obscure .
Significantly , Sema4D was the first extracellular stimulus shown to influence the activity of R-Ras .
These facts collectively prompted us to speculate that plexins regulate integrin mediated cell migration by their R-Ras GAP activity .
In this study , we characterized the role of R-Ras downstream of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 in regulation of integrin activation and cell migration .
The activation of R-Ras by ECM is required for ECM mediated integrin activation and cell migration , and Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 inhibits integrin activation and cell migration through R-Ras GAP activity .
We also revealed that down regulation of phosphatydylinositol 3-kinase ( PI3-K ) activity is responsible for Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 induced suppression of beta 1 integrin activity and cell migration .
Results
Sema4D antagonizes integrin mediated cell migration
We examined the effect of Sema4D on integrin mediated migration of PC12 cells in a cell migration assay ( ) .
Transwell chambers were coated on the lower side with varying concentrations of collagen I. PC12 cells exhibited a collagen concentration dependent promotion of cell migration , which was antagonized by Sema4D .
The collagen dependent PC12 cell migration is mediated by alpha 1 and beta 1 integrin subunits , as functional blocking antibodies against alpha 1 ( ) and beta 1 ( ) integrin subunits strongly impaired the migration .
These results indicate that Sema4D antagonizes the collagen receptor , alpha 1 / beta 1 integrin dependent PC12 cell migration .
Figure 1 .
Sema4D antagonizes integrin mediated cell migration .
( A ) PC12 cells were tested in the transwell assay either in the presence or absence of Sema4D .
Transwell chambers were coated on the lower side with varying concentrations of collagen I. Migrated cells were visualized by the staining of crystal violet .
( C and E ) PC12 cells were pretreated with 5 mug and ml of functional blocking monoclonal antibodies against alpha 1 and beta 1 integrin subunits ( 3A3 and P5D2 , respectively ) or control mouse IgG1 and subjected to the transwell assay .
Migrated cells were visualized by the staining of crystal violet .
( B , D , and F ) Relative cell migration was determined by the number of the migrated cells normalized to the total number of cells .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
Bars , 1 mm .
Sema4D through Plexin-B1 inhibits ECM mediated activation of R-Ras and beta 1 integrins
R-Ras is implicated in integrin mediated cell migration , and expression of a constitutively active form of R-Ras has been shown to stimulate cell migration ( ) .
We previously reported that Sema4D stimulation down-regulates NGF stimulated R-Ras activity via the R-Ras GAP activity of Plexin-B1 to induce neurite retraction ( ) .
We next tested whether stimulation of PC12 cells with collagen and Sema4D affects R-Ras activity .
PC12 cells were plated onto collagen coated dishes and lysed , and the lysates were incubated with the GST fused Ras binding domain of c-Raf-1 ( GST-RBD ) to pull down activated R-Ras ( ) .
As shown in , cells plated on collagen coated dishes showed a collagen concentration dependent increase in endogenous R-Ras activity , whereas those kept in suspension or plated onto the non-integrin-dependent substrate poly-d-lysine did not .
Furthermore , the collagen dependent activation of R-Ras was inhibited by a functional blocking antibody against beta 1 integrins , P5D2 , and was enhanced by affinity related activation of beta 1 integrins by the monoclonal antibody 8A2 , which mechanically induces a high-affinity state of beta 1 integrins .
These data suggest that beta 1 integrins are required for R-Ras activation upon ECM mediated adhesion .
Sema4D stimulation strongly inhibited the collagen induced activation of R-Ras , and affinity related activation of beta 1 integrins by the 8A2 antibody attenuated the inhibitory effect of Sema4D on ECM mediated R-Ras activation .
R-Ras is known to regulate beta 1 integrin activation ( ) .
To examine the effect of Sema4D on beta 1 integrin activity , we measured the activity of beta 1 integrins in cells with or without Sema4D stimulation by the immunoprecipitation assay with the monoclonal antibody against active conformations of beta 1 integrins , HUTS-4 , which detects hybrid domain swing-out in beta 1 integrins , a process most commonly associated with ligand binding ( ) .
Sema4D antagonized the collagen dependent activation of beta 1 integrins ( ) .
Inhibition of beta 1 integrin activity by Sema4D was also observed in the ELISA using the HUTS-4 antibody , which was performed under a detergent-free condition ( ) .
To further ascertain that Sema4D indeed affects the activity of beta 1 integrins , we performed flow cytometry analysis using the HUTS-4 antibody .
As shown in , cells treated with Sema4D showed a decrease in the level of HUTS-4 binding ( FITC staining ) .
Mn 2+ treatment , which induces the activation of beta 1 integrins , resulting in the effective interaction with the ECM ligands and increased HUTS-4 binding ( ) , completely overcame the Sema4D induced decrease in HUTS-4 binding .
These results suggest that decreased HUTS-4 binding induced by Sema4D is due to affinity modulation of beta 1 integrins .
FAK is known to be autophosphorylated at tyrosine upon integrin activation ( ) , and FAK phosphorylation downstream of beta 1 integrins is the important step for integrin mediated cell migration .
As shown in , Sema4D inhibited the collagen mediated FAK tyrosine phosphorylation .
These results suggest that Sema4D inhibits ECM mediated activation of R-Ras and beta 1 integrins .
Figure 2 .
Sema4D inhibits ECM mediated activation of R-Ras and functional activation of beta 1 integrins .
( A ) PC12 cells were collected and kept in suspension ( SUSP ) or replated onto poly-d-lysine ( PDL ) - or collagen ( COL ) - coated ( 1 or 10 mug and ml ) dishes with or without Sema4D in the plating media .
15 min after plating , the cells were lysed and the lysates were incubated with GST-RBD , and bound R-Ras protein and total lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting .
For the indicated samples , cells were treated with 5 mug and ml of monoclonal beta 1 integrin blocking ( P5D2 ) or activating ( 8A2 ) antibody before replating .
Relative R-Ras activity was determined by the amount of R-Ras bound to GST-RBD normalized to the amount of R-Ras in cell lysates analyzed by NIH Image software ( bottom ) .
( B and E ) PC12 cells were seeded onto noncoated or collagen coated ( 10 mug and ml ) dishes , with or without Sema4D in the plating media .
Cells were lysed , and the lysates were immunoprecipitated with an antibody against the active beta 1 integrins , HUTS-4 ( B ) , or an antibody against FAK ( E ) to measure the activity of beta 1 integrins or tyrosine phosphorylated FAK , respectively .
( C ) The ELISA using HUTS-4 antibody was performed to confirm the effect of Sema4D on activity of beta 1 integrins under a detergent-free condition .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
( D ) PC12 cells were treated for 3 h at 37degreesC with control medium or with medium containing Sema4D or Sema4D plus 1 mM Mn 2+ .
Cells were incubated with HUTS-4 antibody or buffer alone ( -1 st Ab ) , followed by labeling with the FITC conjugated secondary antibody .
Fluorescence intensity was determined by flow cytometry analysis .
Error bars indicate SEM .
We also confirmed the involvement of the endogenous Plexin-B1 receptor in Sema4D dependent inhibition of R-Ras activity and integrin functions .
As shown in , both Sema4D dependent inhibition of collagen mediated activation of R-Ras and cell migration were blocked by the monoclonal antibody against Plexin-B1 , which recognizes the extracellular ligand binding region of the receptor .
These results suggest that Sema4D through Plexin-B1 inhibits ECM mediated activation of R-Ras , functional activation of beta 1 integrins , and inhibition of cell migration .
Figure 3 .
Sema4D dependent inhibition of R-Ras activity and ECM mediated cell migration involves the endogenous Plexin-B1 receptor .
( A ) PC12 cells were pretreated with 5 mug and ml of a mouse monoclonal antibody against the extracellular ligand binding region of Plexin-B1 ( PlexB1 Ab ) or the control mouse IgG2b ( Control Ab ) .
PC12 cells were seeded onto noncoated or collagen coated ( 10 mug and ml ) dishes with or without Sema4D in the plating media , and relative R-Ras activity was determined as described in the legend to .
( B ) PC12 cells were pretreated with 5 mug and ml of the monoclonal antibody against Plexin-B1 and were subsequently subjected to the transwell assay in either the presence or absence of Sema4D .
Migrated cells were visualized by the staining of crystal violet .
( C ) Relative cell migration was determined by the number of the migrated cells normalized to the total number of cells .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
Bar , 1 mm .
Inhibition of cell migration by Sema4D is mediated by suppression of beta 1 integrin activity
We tested whether Sema4D mediated inhibition of cell migration is mediated by suppression of beta 1 integrin activity .
PC12 cells preincubated with 5 mug and ml beta 1 integrin activating monoclonal antibody ( 8A2 ) were subjected to the transwell assay .
We tested the migration at relatively low concentrations of collagen ( ~ 3.0 mug and ml ) because this antibody inhibits cell migration at high concentration of the ECM ligands by freezing beta 1 at a high-affinity state ( ) .
As shown in , affinity related activation of beta 1 integrins by 8A2 stimulation overcame the inhibitory effect of Sema4D on collagen mediated cell migration , whereas a control IgG2a antibody did not .
These results suggest that the inhibition of beta 1 integrin activity is required for the inhibition of cell migration by Sema4D .
Figure 4 .
Affinity related activation of beta 1 integrins overcomes the inhibitory effect of Sema4D on collagen mediated PC12 cell migration .
( A and B ) PC12 cells were pretreated with 5 mug and ml of beta 1 integrin activating monoclonal antibody ( 8A2 ) or control IgG2a ( Control Ab ) and were subsequently subjected to the transwell assay in either the presence or absence of Sema4D .
Migrated cells were visualized by the staining of crystal violet .
( B ) Relative cell migration was determined by the number of migrated cells normalized to the total number of cells .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
Bar , 1 mm .
Plexin-B1 inhibits ECM dependent activation of R-Ras and beta 1 integrins through its R-Ras GAP activity
We recently reported that Plexin-B1 encodes R-Ras GAP within its cytoplasmic tail and that Plexin-B1 associated with the Rho family GTPase Rnd1 functions as a specific GAP toward R-Ras ( ) .
We examined whether Sema4D and Plexin-B 1-Rnd1-mediated R-Ras GAP activity suppresses adhesion dependent R-Ras activation .
COS-7 cells expressing R-Ras-wild type ( WT ) were plated onto fibronectin coated dishes or nonadherent control dishes and lysed , and the lysates were incubated with GST-RBD to pull down activated R-Ras .
The same cell lysates were also used for the immunoprecipitation assay using HUTS-4 for measurement of the activity of beta 1 integrins .
In COS-7 cells , fibronectin stimulation activated both R-Ras and beta 1 integrins ( ) .
As shown in , expression of Plexin-B1-WT and Rnd1 inhibited the fibronectin mediated R-Ras activation in the presence of Sema4D .
However , this inhibitory effect was not observed in cells expressing Plexin-B1-GGA , a mutant lacking the ability to associate with Rnd1 , or Plexin-B1-RA , a mutant lacking primary and secondary arginine residues required for the catalytic activity of GAP .
These results suggest that Sema4D and Plexin-B 1-Rnd1-mediated R-Ras GAP activity inhibits adhesion dependent R-Ras activation .
To examine the effect of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1-Rnd1-mediated R-Ras GAP activity on beta 1 integrin activity , we measured the activity of beta 1 integrins in cells expressing Plexin-B1 and Rnd1 with or without Sema4D stimulation by the immunoprecipitation assay .
As shown in , expression of Plexin-B1 and Rnd1 strongly inhibited the fibronectin mediated beta 1 integrin activation in the presence of Sema4D , whereas inhibition of beta 1 integrin activation was not observed in cells expressing Plexin-B1-GGA or Plexin-B1-RA .
The same results were also obtained by the ELISA using the HUTS-4 antibody performed under a detergent-free condition ( ) .
We also confirmed the results by flow cytometry analysis .
COS-7 cells transiently cotransfected with GFP-Rnd1 and Plexin-B1 were treated with Sema4D , and GFP expression and HUTS-4 binding ( phycoerythrin [ PE ] staining ) were simultaneously analyzed by two-color flow cytometry .
HUTS-4 binding ( PE staining ) was analyzed on a gated subset of cells positive for GFP expression to discriminate beta 1 integrin activity of transfected cells from that of untransfected cells .
As shown in , a Sema4D dependent decrease in HUTS-4 binding was observed in Plexin-B1-WT and Rnd1 expressing cells .
However , cells coexpressing Rnd1 with Plexin-B1-RA or Plexin-B1-GGA , which lacks R-Ras GAP activity , did not show a Sema4D dependent reduction in HUTS-4 binding .
In addition , Sema4D and Plexin-B 1-Rnd1 also inhibited the fibronectin mediated FAK tyrosine phosphorylation , whereas inhibition of FAK phosphorylation was not observed in cells expressing Plexin-B1-GGA or Plexin-B1-RA ( ) .
These results suggest that Sema4D and Plexin-B 1-Rnd1-mediated R-Ras GAP activity inhibits adhesion dependent activation of R-Ras and thereby inhibits functional activation of beta 1 integrins .
Figure 5 .
Plexin-B1-mediated R-Ras GAP activity inhibits ECM dependent activation of R-Ras and beta 1 integrins .
( A ) COS-7 cells transfected with HA tagged wild-type R-Ras were detached with 1.5 mM EDTA , replated onto the dishes coated with or without 10 mug and ml fibronectin ( FN ) , and incubated at 37degreesC for 15 min .
( top ) The cell lysates were incubated with either the antibody against the active conformations of beta 1 integrins HUTS-4 or GST-RBD to see the activity of beta 1 integrins or R-Ras , respectively .
( bottom ) Relative activity of R-Ras or beta 1 integrins was normalized to the amount of R-Ras or beta 1 integrins in cell lysates analyzed by NIH Image software .
( B , C , and F ) COS-7 cells transfected with mutants of Myc tagged Plexin-B1 and HA tagged Rnd1 were detached with 1.5 mM EDTA .
The cells were either kept in suspension ( SUSP ) or replated onto the dishes coated with 10 mug and ml fibronectin and incubated at 37degreesC for 15 min in the presence or absence of Sema4D .
Relative activity of R-Ras ( B ) and beta 1 integrins ( C ) and tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK ( F ) were measured .
( D , top ) The ELISA using HUTS-4 antibody was performed to confirm the effect of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 mediated R-Ras GAP activity on activity of beta 1 integrins under the detergent-free condition .
( bottom ) Expression levels of each construct were verified by immunoblot analysis .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
( E ) COS-7 cells transiently cotransfected with GFP-Rnd1 and Plexin-B1 were stimulated for 5 min with Sema4D and analyzed by two-color flow cytometry .
HUTS-4 binding ( PE staining ) was analyzed on a gated subset of cells , positive for GFP expression to discriminate beta 1 integrin activity of transfected cells from that of untransfected cells .
Level of HUTS-4 binding in cells expressing GFP-Rnd1 and various Plexin-B1 expression constructs , with or without Sema4D stimulation , was analyzed .
Error bars indicate SEM .
R-Ras activity is required for the ECM mediated activation of beta 1 integrins
We next examined whether regulation of R-Ras activity plays key roles in the ECM mediated activation of beta 1 integrins .
As shown in , in untransfected cells , activity of beta 1 integrins was increased upon adhesion to fibronectin .
This activation was completely blocked by the down regulation of endogenous R-Ras activity by the expression of the myristoylated GAP domain of p98-R-RasGAP ( Myr-R-RasGAP ) , which exhibits a specific GAP activity toward R-Ras ( ) .
R-Ras is implicated in integrin regulation , and the constitutively active form of R-Ras has been shown to increase the affinity of beta 1 integrins for fibronectin ( ) and to stimulate cell migration ( ) .
Expression of R-Ras-QL actually induced remarkable activation of beta 1 integrins , and this was not further enhanced by fibronectin .
We also tested whether R-Ras activity affects FAK tyrosine phosphorylation .
As shown in , expression of Myr-R-RasGAP completely blocked the fibronectin induced FAK phosphorylation , whereas R-Ras-QL markedly stimulated FAK phosphorylation independent of fibronectin , indicating that endogenous R-Ras activity is also required for ECM mediated FAK phosphorylation .
We further confirmed requirement of R-Ras in the ECM mediated functional activation of beta 1 integrins .
We reduced expression of R-Ras in COS-7 cells by R-Ras-specific siRNA expression vector and examined the effect on the activation of beta 1 integrins and phosphorylation of FAK .
As shown in ( C and D ) , expression of R-Ras siRNA effectively reduced endogenous R-Ras protein , and reduction in R-Ras protein blocked both the fibronectin dependent activation of beta 1 integrins and phosphorylation of FAK .
The ELISA using HUTS-4 , under detergent-free conditions , also confirmed suppression of beta 1 integrin activation by inactivation of R-Ras by expression of Myr-R-RasGAP or knockdown of R-Ras by R-Ras RNA interference ( ) .
We also confirmed these results by two-color flow cytometry .
COS-7 cells transiently transfected with Myr- R-RasGAP or an R-Ras siRNA together with GFP were stained with HUTS-4 , and HUTS-4 binding ( PE staining ) was analyzed on GFP positive cells .
As shown in , the level of HUTS-4 binding was reduced in cells expressing Myr-R-RasGAP or R-Ras siRNA .
These results demonstrate that activation of the endogenous R-Ras protein is essential for the ECM mediated functional activation of beta 1 integrins .
Figure 6 .
R-Ras activity is required for ECM mediated activation of beta 1 integrins .
( A-D ) COS-7 cells expressing the indicated expression plasmids were detached with 1.5 mM EDTA in PBS and kept in suspension ( SUSP ) or replated onto the dishes coated with 20 mug and ml poly-d-lysine ( PDL ) or 10 mug and ml fibronectin ( FN ) .
After 15 min , activity of beta 1 integrins ( A and C ) and tyrosine phosphorylated FAK ( B and D ) were measured .
( E and F , top ) The ELISA using HUTS-4 was performed under a detergent-free condition .
( bottom ) Expression levels of each construct or the levels of endogenous R-Ras protein in cells transfected with siRNAs were verified by immunoblot analysis .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
( G ) COS-7 cells transiently transfected with Myr-R-RasGAP or an R-Ras siRNA together with GFP were stained with HUTS-4 , and HUTS-4 binding ( PE staining ) was analyzed on GFP positive cells .
Plexin-B1 inhibits cell migration through R-Ras GAP activity
We next examined the effect of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 signaling on integrin mediated cell migration .
COS-7 cells expressing a control GFP alone exhibited a fibronectin concentration dependent promotion of cell migration , and ectopic expression of GFP- R-Ras-WT enhanced this fibronectin dependent cell migration ( ) .
Coexpression of Plexin-B1-WT and Rnd1 with R-Ras-WT blocked the R-Ras-induced promotion of cell migration toward fibronectin , in the presence of Sema4D at the lower well ( ) .
On the other hand , expression of Plexin-B1-RA , a mutant of Plexin-B1 that lacks R-Ras GAP activity , did not exhibit the Sema4D dependent inhibition of cell migration toward fibronectin ( ) .
Association of Rnd1 with Plexin-B1 is essential for the expression of R-Ras GAP activity of Plexin-B1 ( ) , and inhibition of cell migration was not observed in the cells without Rnd1 or in the cells expressing Plexin-B1-GGA , a mutant of Plexin-B1 unable to interact with Rnd1 ( ) .
The Plexin-B subfamily has been shown to activate RhoA via its COOH-terminal PDZ domain binding motif .
However , Plexin-B1-DeltaC , a mutant of Plexin-B1 that lacks the PDZ domain binding motif but still has R-Ras GAP activity ( ) , inhibited fibronectin dependent cell migration in the presence of Sema4D ( ) .
Cell migration mediated by constitutively active R-Ras , R-Ras-QL , was not suppressed by the Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 and Rnd1 complex ( ) .
Expression levels of these constructs used in the assay were similar , as verified by immunoblot analysis ( not depicted ) .
Furthermore , R-Ras activity is essential for ECM mediated cell migration , as both inactivation of R-Ras by expression of Myr-R-RasGAP or knockdown of R-Ras by R-Ras RNA interference almost completely suppressed the fibronectin dependent cell migration ( ) .
Figure 7 .
Plexin-B1 inhibits ECM mediated cell migration through R-Ras GAP activity .
( A and B ) COS-7 cells expressing GFP or GFP-R-Ras-WT were used in a cell migration assay , using transwell chambers coated on the lower side with varying concentrations of fibronectin ( FN ) .
Migrated cells were visualized by the fluorescence of GFP ( A ) , and relative cell migration was determined ( B ) .
( C ) COS-7 cells expressing GFP-R-Ras-WT together with Plexin-B1-WT and Rnd1 were tested in the transwell assay in either the presence or absence of Sema4D .
( D ) COS-7 cells expressing the listed plasmids were tested in the transwell assay using the chambers coated with varying concentrations of fibronectin in either the presence ( closed symbols ) or absence ( open symbols ) of Sema4D .
Migrated cells were visualized by the fluorescence of GFP .
( E ) Relative cell migration at the point of 20 mug and ml fibronectin with or without Sema4D was determined .
Expression levels of the constructs were verified by immunoblot analysis ( not depicted ) .
( F ) COS-7 cells transfected with the indicated plasmids were tested in a cell migration assay using the transwells coated on the lower sides with varying concentrations of fibronectin .
Relative cell migration was determined by the number of the migrated cells normalized to the total number of the transfected cells .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
Bars , 1 mm .
We further confirmed that the R-Ras GAP activity exhibited by endogenous Plexin-B1 is required for Sema4D mediated inhibition of ECM mediated PC12 cell migration .
We recently reported that the cytoplasmic region of Plexin-B1 by nature takes the intramolecularly tethered form and that disruption of the interaction between the NH 2 -terminal region ( N-Cyt ) and the COOH-terminal region ( C-Cyt ) within the cytoplasmic domain ( ) by Rnd1 binding to N-Cyt is essential for exhibiting the R-Ras GAP activity .
C-Cyt associates with N-Cyt-GGA , which has no ability to interact with Rnd1 , and Rnd1 can not disrupt this interaction ( ) .
As shown in , overexpression of Plexin-B1-N-Cyt-GGA could effectively block the Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 and Rnd1 complex mediated R-Ras GAP activity , suggesting that Plexin-B1- N-Cyt-GGA could be an effective tool to inhibit the R-Ras GAP activity of Plexin-B1 in a dominant negative manner .
Overexpression of Plexin-B1-N-Cyt-GGA in PC12 cells almost completely blocked the Sema4D mediated inhibition of ECM mediated cell migration ( ) .
Figure 8 .
R-Ras GAP activity of endogenous Plexin-B1 is required for Sema4D mediated inhibition of integrin mediated PC12 cell migration .
( A ) Schematic representation of the Plexin-B1-N-Cyt-GGA construct used in the experiment .
The Rnd1 binding region and the R-Ras GAP domains ( C1 and C2 ) are indicated .
Letters indicate the specific amino acid residues within domains ( A , Ala ; F , Phe ; G , Gly ; L , Leu ; P , Pro ; R , Arg ; V , Val ) , and numbers indicate amino acid positions within the sequence .
( B ) Relative activity of R-Ras was determined as described in the legend to .
( C ) PC12 cells transfected with GFP alone or GFP plus HA-Plexin-B1-N-Cyt-GGA were tested in the transwell assay in either the presence or absence of Sema4D .
( D ) Relative cell migration was determined by the number of the migrated cells normalized to the total number of cells .
Migrated cells were visualized by the fluorescence of GFP .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
Bar , 1 mm .
We also examined the role of endogenous R-Ras protein in PC12 cell migration .
Transfection of the R-Ras siRNA effectively reduced the expression of endogenous R-Ras protein in PC12 cells , whereas the control siRNA did not work , and expression of R-Ras siRNA almost completely suppressed the collagen dependent cell migration , suggesting that R-Ras is a prime regulator for integrin mediated cell migration in PC12 cells .
These results demonstrate that activation of endogenous R-Ras protein is essential for the ECM mediated cell migration and that regulation of R-Ras activity through Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 mediated R-Ras GAP activity plays a key role in ECM mediated cell migration .
Sema4D and Plexin-B 1-Rnd1 inhibits PI3-K activity through its R-Ras GAP activity
PI3-K is the predominant effector of R-Ras , and R-Ras-mediated cell migration is sensitive to pharmacological PI3-K inhibitors .
Expression of R-Ras-QL induces the ECM independent functional activation of beta 1 integrins and tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK ( ) and causes COS-7 cell migration in the absence of ECM ligands ( ) .
The D64A mutation of R-Ras or the pharmacological PI3-K inhibitor LY294002 abrogated the cell migration induced by R-Ras-QL ( ) .
R-Ras-QL-64A , the effector loop mutant of R-Ras , impairs the ability of R-Ras to activate PI3-K ( ) , and R-Ras-QL-mediated phosphorylation of the PI3-K effector Akt ( PKB ) was abolished by the D64A mutation ( ) .
We further examined the involvement of PI3-K in R-Ras-QL-induced activation of beta 1 integrins and subsequent FAK phosphorylation .
As shown in , D64A mutation or LY294002 treatment markedly blocked both R-Ras-QL-induced activation of beta 1 integrins and phosphorylation of the downstream effector FAK .
It has been reported that prominent PI3-K-dependent phosphorylation of Akt occurs in response to beta 1 integrin mediated adhesion ( ) .
We examined the effect of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 mediated R-Ras GAP activity on PI3-K activity by measuring the phosphorylation of Akt .
As shown in , expression of Plexin-B1-WT and Rnd1 inhibited the fibronectin mediated Akt phosphorylation in the presence of Sema4D .
However , this inhibition was not observed in cells expressing Plexin-B1-GGA or Plexin-B1-RA that had no ability to exhibit R-Ras GAP activity ( ) .
These results suggest that PI3-K activity is necessary for R-Ras-mediated activation of beta 1 integrins and that Sema4D and Plexin-B 1-Rnd1 inactivates PI3-K through down regulation of R-Ras activity .
Figure 9 .
Sema4D and Plexin-B 1-Rnd1 inhibits PI3-K activity through inactivation of R-Ras .
( A ) COS-7 cells transfected with GFP-R-Ras-QL or its effector loop mutant , R-Ras-QL-64A , were tested in a cell migration assay using the noncoated bare transwells in either the presence or absence of 20 muM LY294002 .
Bar , 1 mm .
( B ) Relative cell migration was determined .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
( C ) Phosphorylated and total Akt were analyzed by immunoblotting with phospho-Akt ( Ser473 ) and total Akt antibodies .
( D and E ) The state of beta 1 integrin activity ( D ) and FAK tyrosine phosphorylation ( E ) were analyzed .
( F ) COS-7 cells prepared as described in the legend to were directly lysed on dishes , and the lysates were analyzed by the immunoblot analysis with phospho-Akt ( Ser473 ) and total Akt antibodies .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
Down regulation of PI3-K activity is responsible for Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 induced suppression of beta 1 integrin activity
To clear out the role of PI3-K downstream of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 , leading to suppression of beta 1 integrin activity , we transfected p110alpha-CAAX , a constitutively active form of PI3-K ( ) , and tested the ability of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 to inhibit beta 1 integrin activation .
In COS-7 cells , overexpression of p110alpha-CAAX by itself did not induce beta 1 integrin activation in the absence of fibronectin .
On the other hand , overexpression of the kinase-dead form of p110alpha blocked the fibronectin dependent beta 1 integrin activation .
These results suggest that PI3-K activity is necessary but that PI3-K activity by itself is not sufficient for inducing beta 1 integrin activation .
We next examined whether the down regulation of PI3-K activity downstream of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 is necessary for inhibition of beta 1 integrin activity .
As shown in , overexpression of p110alpha-CAAX blocked Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 dependent inactivation of beta 1 integrins .
We also examined the ability of Sema4D to inhibit cell migration in cells expressing p110alpha-CAAX .
As shown in , overexpression of p110alpha-CAAX in PC12 cells almost completely blocked the Sema4D mediated inhibition of cell migration .
These results suggest that down regulation of PI3-K activity , downstream of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 , is responsible for suppression of beta 1 integrin activity and inhibition of the ECM mediated cell migration .
Figure 10 .
Down regulation of PI3-K activity is responsible for Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 induced suppression of beta 1 integrin activity .
( A , left ) Lysates of COS-7 cells expressing p110alpha-CAAX , a constitutively active form of PI3-K , or its kinase-dead ( KD ) form were immunoprecipitated with HUTS-4 .
( right ) Relative beta 1 integrin activity was analyzed .
( B ) Activity of beta 1 integrins in COS-7 cells expressing the indicated expression plasmids with or without Sema4D stimulation were examined .
( C and D ) PC12 cells transfected with GFP alone ( open symbols ) or GFP plus p110alpha-CAAX ( closed symbols ) were tested in the transwell assay in either the presence or absence of Sema4D .
Results are the means + /- SEM of three independent experiments .
Bar , 1 mm .
Discussion
Cell migration is a fundamental cellular process in many cell types , and semaphorins are known to act as a negative regulator for integrin mediated cell migration .
We show that the Sema4D receptor , Plexin-B1 , down-regulates R-Ras activity and inhibits ECM mediated integrin activation and cell migration through its R-Ras GAP activity .
R-Ras is implicated in integrin regulation , and a constitutively active form of R-Ras has been shown to increase the affinity of integrins for fibronectin ( ) and to stimulate cell migration ( ) .
We have examined a role of R-Ras in ECM mediated integrin activation and cell migration and showed that R-Ras is markedly activated by the ECM and that this activation is required for activation of beta 1 integrins and subsequent cell migration , as inactivation of R-Ras activity by expression of the GAP domain of p98-R-RasGAP or knockdown of R-Ras by R-Ras-specific siRNA markedly reduces ECM mediated integrin activation and cell migration .
Our results also revealed that beta 1 integrins are required for R-Ras activation upon ECM mediated adhesion .
This suggests a positive feedback during cell-substrate adhesion , implicating R-Ras activation and the consequent further strengthening of integrin mediated functions .
Therefore , R-Ras is a central regulator for ECM mediated integrin activation and cell migration , and the regulation of R-Ras activity is critical for integrin mediated cell migration .
Semaphorins are implicated in migration of a variety of cells .
Stimulation of Plexin-B1 by Sema4D is reported to hamper integrin based adhesion and cell migration in NIH-3T3 cells ( ) .
We have reported that Plexin-B1 encodes an R-Ras GAP in the cytoplasmic tail and that stimulation of the Plexin-B1-Rnd1 complex by Sema4D induces the R-Ras GAP activity and resultant repulsive response of neuronal growth cone ( ) .
We demonstrate here that Plexin-B1 / Rnd1 mediated R-Ras GAP activity is also involved in Sema4D induced inhibition of integrin activation and cell migration .
Furthermore , the COOH-terminal PDZ domain binding motif of Plexin-B1 is dispensable for suppression of integrin activity and cell migration by Sema4D .
In addition to Sema4D , class 3 semaphorins have been shown to control adhesion and migration of endothelial cells by inhibiting integrin function ( ) , and Sema3A signaling deficient mice have shown defective migration of neural crest cells ( ) .
Furthermore , Plexin-C1 , a receptor of semaphorin A39R , was recently reported to inhibit integrin mediated adhesion and chemokine induced migration ( ) .
The R-Ras GAP-homologous domains are well conserved among plexin families , including Plexin-A and -C1 .
In addition , we recently reported that the down regulation of R-Ras activity is also required for the Sema3A and Plexin-A-induced repulsive response in hippocampal neurons ( ) .
We speculate that the direct regulation of R-Ras activity by plexins is likely to be a mutual signaling pathway among plexin families and that this R-Ras GAP activity of plexin families may be a critical signaling system for semaphorin regulated cell migration .
Semaphorins were initially identified as repulsive factors for axon guidance , and many neurons use members of the integrin family of cell surface receptors for responses to neurite growth promoting factors , and integrin activation regulates neurite outgrowth ( ) .
Recently , expression of constitutively active R-Ras was shown to promote integrin dependent neurite outgrowth of retinal neurons , suggesting that R-Ras activity plays an important role in integrin dependent neurite outgrowth ( ) .
Therefore , it is proposed that the down regulation of R-Ras activity by Plexin-B1 via R-Ras GAP activity suppresses R-Ras-mediated integrin activation and thereby induces growth cone collapse and inhibition of neurite outgrowth .
With respect to signaling of other repulsive factors , the ephrin-B1 receptor EphB2 , another family of the repulsive factor receptor , was also reported to suppress integrin mediated functions by inactivating R-Ras ( ) , suggesting that repulsive guidance cues inhibit integrin mediated functions by inactivating R-Ras in general and that R-Ras acts as a common regulator of integrin activation and cell migration ( ) .
We also examined the downstream signaling of Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 mediated R-Ras GAP activity leading to inactivation of beta 1 integrins and found that down regulation of PI3-K activity is responsible for Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 induced suppression of beta 1 integrin activity and cell migration .
PI3-K activity is known to be required for R-Ras-mediated enhancement of cell migration .
PI3-K has emerged as the predominant effector for R-Ras , and R-Ras is a more potent activator of PI3-K than other Ras family members .
On the other hand , PI3-K activity has been shown to promote interaction between talin with the beta 1 integrin cytoplasmic tail , leading to the clustering and activation of integrins .
Integrin activation by mechanical stretch is also mediated by PI3-K and is followed by an increase in integrin binding to the extracellular matrix proteins ( ) .
Therefore , elevated PI3-K activity by activated R-Ras may trigger a sequence of events leading to clustering and activation of integrins , although overexpression of p110alpha-CAAX by itself is not sufficient for inducing beta 1 integrin activation .
We used the monoclonal antibody HUTS-4 , which detects hybrid domain swing-out in beta 1 integrins , a process most commonly associated with ligand binding affinity ( ) , to measure activity of beta 1 integrins and revealed that Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 mediated R-Ras GAP activity suppresses affinity of beta 1 integrins through inactivation of PI3-K activity .
Consistent with our results , a previous report demonstrated that an R-Ras-mediated increase in affinity of the beta 1 integrins is dependent on PI3-K activity by performing the ligand binding assay in mast cells ( ) .
On the other hand , have shown that PI3-K activity is not required for R-Ras-mediated integrin activation in CHO cells by using a ligand-mimetic antibody , PAC-1 .
Therefore , we speculate that this discrepancy may be due to the differences in ways to measure integrin activity or that R-Ras may regulate integrin activity via both PI3-K-dependent and -independent pathways , depending on the cell type .
In conclusion , our results demonstrate that R-Ras activity is required for ECM mediated integrin activation and cell migration and that the Sema4D and Plexin-B 1 and Rnd1 complex regulates integrin activation and cell migration through the R-Ras GAP activity .
However , a variety of molecules such as ErbB-2 and Met have been known to be involved in plexin signaling , inducing diverse physiological functions .
It was recently shown that Plexin-B1 enhances chemotaxis of endothelial cells through the activation of multiple intracellular tyrosine kinase cascades independent of the R-Ras GAP activity ( ) .
Regulation of R-Ras activity , tyrosine kinases , and other signaling mechanisms may participate in diverse actions of plexins .
Further work will be required to delineate the precise mechanism of R-Ras-mediated integrin activation and its regulation by plexins for cell migration during physiological and pathological processes , including neural cell migration , angiogenesis , and tumor metastasis .
Materials and methods
DNA constructs and site directed mutagenesis
Plexin-B1 cDNA was provided by L. Tamagnone ( Torino University , Torino , Italy ) .
HA tagged Rnd1 ; HA- and GFP tagged human R-Ras and R-Ras-QL ( Q87L ) ; the GST fused Ras binding domain of c-Raf-1 ( amino acids 53-130 ) ; the NH 2 -terminal HA tagged myristoylated form of R-RasGAP ; and Myc tagged Plexin-B1 , Plexin-B1-GGA ( L1849G , V1850G , and P1851A ) , Plexin-B1-RA ( R1677A , R1678A , and R1984A ) , Plexin-B1-DeltaC ( lacking the last seven COOH-terminal amino acids ) , and Plexin-B1- N-Cyt-GGA ( amino acids 1511-1915 ) were described previously .
The effector loop mutant of R-Ras , R-Ras-DA ( D64A ) , was generated by a PCR mediated mutagenesis .
NH 2 -terminal FLAG tagged p110alpha was a gift from T. Katada ( Tokyo University , Tokyo , Japan ) , and CAAX sequence was fused to the COOH terminus to create a constitutively active form as described previously ( ) .
The specific siRNA for R-Ras was designed to target 19 nucleotides at nucleotides 359 and 377 ( 5 ' - gcaagctcttcactcagat-3 ' ) , whereas the control siRNA was designed at nucleotides 426 and 444 ( 5 ' - caaggcagatctggagaca-3 ' ) , and both were expressed by using a siRNA expression vector ( Ambion ) as described previously ( ) .
Antibodies and reagents
The pharmacological PI3-K inhibitor LY294002 was purchased from Calbiochem .
A soluble form of Sema4D fused to human IgG 1 -Fc was a gift from H. Kikutani ( Osaka University , Osaka , Japan ) .
We used the following antibodies : mouse monoclonal antibodies against Myc and phosphotyrosine ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against p125-FAK ( Upstate Biotechnology ) ; mouse monoclonal antibodies against alpha-tubulin ( Sigma-Aldrich ) , beta 1 integrins ( BD Biosciences ) , and active beta 1 integrins , HUTS-4 ( Chemicon ) ; a rabbit polyclonal antibody against R-Ras ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc. ) ; a rat monoclonal antibody against HA ( Roche ) ; and HRP conjugated secondary antibodies ( DakoCytomation ) .
For functional studies in the transwell assay , we used the following antibodies : the affinity related beta 1 integrin activating monoclonal antibody 8A2 ( IgG2a ) ; the functional blocking monoclonal antibody against the integrin alpha 1 subunit , 3A3 ( IgG1 ; Serotec ) ; the functional blocking monoclonal antibody against the integrin beta 1 subunit , P5D2 ( IgG1 ; Chemicon ) ; and a mouse monoclonal antibody against the extracellular ligand binding region ( raised against amino acids 771-1070 of human origin ) of Plexin-B1 ( IgG2b ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc. ) .
FITC- and PE conjugated F ( ab ' ) 2 -specific secondary antibodies for flow cytometry were purchased from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories .
The PhosphoPlus Akt Antibody kit ( Cell Signaling ) was used for the analysis of the phosphorylation state of Akt .
Immunoblotting
Proteins were separated by 12.5 % SDS-PAGE and were electrophoretically transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane ( Millipore ) .
The membrane was blocked with 3 % low-fat milk in TBS and incubated with primary antibodies .
The primary antibodies were detected with HRP conjugated secondary antibodies and a chemiluminescence detection kit ( Chemi-Lumi One ; Nacalai Tesque ) .
Images were captured using a LAS 1000 analyzer ( Fuji ) equipped with Image Gauge 4.0 software ( Fuji ) .
Immunofluorescence microscopy
Cells on coverslips were fixed with 4 % PFA in PBS for 15 min and washed with PBS five times .
Cells were permeabilized with 0.2 % Triton X-100 in PBS for 10 min and incubated with 10 % FBS in PBS for 30 min to block nonspecific antibody binding .
Cells were incubated with an anti-R-Ras antibody ( 1:200 dilution ) for 1 h and then incubated with an Alexa Fluor 594 conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h. Cells were washed in PBS for 1 h and mounted in 90 % glycerol containing 0.1 % p-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride in PBS .
Images were captured at RT using a microscope ( Eclipse E800 ; Nikon ) and a 40 x 0.75 objective ( Nikon ) equipped with a digital camera ( DC350F ; Leica ) .
The images were arranged and labeled using Photoshop software ( Adobe ) .
Cell culture and transfection
COS-7 cells were cultured in DME containing 10 % FBS , 4 mM glutamine , 100 U and ml penicillin , and 0.2 mg and ml streptomycin under humidified conditions in 95 % air and 5 % CO 2 at 37degreesC .
PC12 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 with 10 % horse serum ( HS ) and 5 % FBS .
Transient transfections were performed with Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer 's instructions .
A soluble form of Sema4D was expressed as a fusion protein with the Fc fragment of human IgG 1 .
Stimulation with Sema4D was performed by incubation of the cells with Sema4D-Fc-containing medium at 37degreesC .
Cell migration assay
10 4 cells were detached with 1.5 mM EDTA in PBS , washed three times with serum-free medium , resuspended in DME containing 1 % BSA , seeded on the upper side of 8-mum pore filters of Transwell chambers ( Costar ) , which were coated on the lower side with varying concentrations of either fibronectin or collagen I ( Sigma-Aldrich ) , and incubated for 7 h. Cells on the upper side of the filters were mechanically removed , and cells on the lower side were fixed with 4 % PFA .
The numbers of migrated cells through the filter were counted by the fluorescence of GFP or the staining with crystal violet ( A ) .
At the same time , the cells were seeded onto 24-well plastic culture plates to count the total number of transfected cells ( B ) .
Relative cell migration was then determined by the number of migrated cells normalized to the total number of transfected cells ( A and B ) .
Unless described , the value from the GFP transfected cells in the absence of coating was defined as 1 .
For functional studies using activating or inhibitory monoclonal antibodies , cells were pretreated with 5 mug and ml of antibodies or corresponding negative IgG controls for 5 min before seeding onto the transwells .
Images were captured at RT in PBS using a microscope ( Eclipse TE300-FN ; Nikon ) and a Plan Fluor 10 x 0.30 objective ( Nikon ) equipped with digital camera ( DS-L1 and DS-5M ; Nikon ) .
The images were arranged and labeled using Photoshop 7.0 software .
Measurement of the activity of beta 1 integrins by immunoprecipitation
Measurement of beta 1 integrin activity by immunoprecipitation was performed as described previously ( ) .
3 x 10 6 COS-7 cells were maintained in DME containing 1 % FBS after transfection .
16 h after transfection , cells were detached with 1.5 mM EDTA in PBS , washed three times with serum-free medium , and resuspended in 10 ml of 1 % BSA in DME with or without Sema4D-Fc .
The cell suspension was plated onto 10-cm plates coated with or without 10 mug and ml fibronectin and incubated at 37degreesC for 15 min .
The cells were lysed directly on dishes with ice-cold cell lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris-HCl , pH 7.5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X-100 , 10 % glycerol , 1 mM sodium vanadate , 25 mM NaF , 10 mug and ml pepstatin , 1 mM PMSF , 10 mug and ml aprotinin , and 10 mug and ml leupeptin ) containing 5 mug and ml HUTS-4 , immunoprecipitated for 2 h , and subsequently incubated with protein G-Sepharose beads ( GE Healthcare ) for 1 h at 4degreesC .
After the beads were washed twice with the ice-cold cell lysis buffer , the bound proteins were eluted in Laemmli sample buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting with the monoclonal antibody against beta 1 integrins .
To measure the activity of beta 1 integrins in PC12 cells , 10 6 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 containing 1 % HS for 12 h , detached with 1.5 mM EDTA in PBS , washed three times with serum-free medium , and resuspended in 10 ml of 1 % BSA in RPMI 1640 with or without Sema4D-Fc .
The cell suspension was plated onto 10-cm plates coated with or without 10 mug and ml collagen I and incubated at 37degreesC for 3 h .
The cells were lysed directly on dishes with ice-cold cell lysis buffer .
Measurement of the activity of beta 1 integrins by ELISAs
Measurement of the activity of beta 1 integrins by ELISAs under detergent-free condition was performed as described previously ( ) .
10 5 cells transfected in 24-well plastic culture plates were detached with 1.5 mM EDTA in PBS , washed three times with serum-free medium , and resuspended in 1 ml DME containing 1 % BSA , with or without Sema4D-Fc .
One tenth of the resuspended cells ( 100 mul ) were seeded onto the 96-well assay plates , which were coated with 10 mug and ml of either fibronectin or collagen I. Cell adhesion was allowed for 15 min at 37degreesC .
Then , the cells were delicately washed once with PBS and the adherent cells were fixed with 4 % PFA .
After the fixative , the cells were thoroughly rinsed with PBS containing 0.1 % BSA .
To avoid nonspecific binding , the cells were incubated with PBS containing 5 % BSA for 3 h at RT. .
Cells were then incubated overnight at 4degreesC with 2 mug and ml HUTS-4 .
After the incubation with primary antibody , the wells were rinsed and blocked with PBS containing 5 % BSA for 3 h at RT before they were exposed to an HRP- conjugated secondary antibody .
After the incubation , cells were rinsed again with PBS followed by distilled H 2 O .
The peroxidase color reaction was developed in the dark using O-phenylenediamine according to the manufacturer 's instructions ( ELISA OPD kit ; Nacalai Tesque ) , and the plate was read on a kinetic microtiter plate reader ( GENios ; Tecan ) using the XFluor4 program ( Tecan ) .
The antibody concentration and incubation times were optimized to ensure testing in the linear range .
Expression levels of the constructs used in the assay were also verified by immunoblot analysis .
Flow cytometry analysis
Analysis of cell surface expression of active beta 1 integrins by flow cytometry was performed as described previously ( ) .
10 6 PC12 cells were seeded onto 6-cm noncoated plates in RPMI 1640 containing 10 % HS and 5 % FBS .
18 h after seeding , cells were treated with medium containing Sema4D-Fc or Sema4D-Fc plus 1 mM Mn 2+ for 3 h at 37degreesC .
Cells were washed once with PBS and resuspended in blocking solution containing 5 % dissociation buffer ( Invitrogen ) and 2 % sheep serum in PBS .
Cells were then incubated with 2.5 mug HUTS-4 or buffer alone for 1 h at 4degreesC , washed with the blocking solution , and labeled with FITC conjugated secondary antibody for 30 min at 4degreesC .
Cells were then washed and analyzed with an EPICS ELITE flow cytometer using the EXPO32 analysis program ( Beckman Coulter ) .
For the analysis of active beta 1 integrins in transiently transfected COS-7 cells , 10 6 cells were transfected with a GFP expression vector together with various other expression vectors .
Cells were kept for 18 h in DME containing 10 % FBS after transfection , stimulated for 5 min at 37degreesC with or without Sema4D-Fc , and were collected and incubated with HUTS-4 antibody or buffer alone as described previously in this section .
Cells were labeled with a PE conjugated secondary antibody , and expression of GFP and activity of beta 1 integrins ( PE staining ) were simultaneously analyzed by two-color flow cytometry .
Analysis of the intensity of PE staining in a GFP positive population was performed as described previously ( ) .
Approximately 10,000 cells were analyzed in each experiment , and the results shown are representative of two independent experiments .
Measurement of R-Ras activity
Measurement of R-Ras activity in cells was performed as described previously ( ) .
7 x 10 5 COS-7 cells were maintained in DME containing 1 % FBS after transfection .
The cell suspension was prepared as described ( see Measurement of the activity of beta 1 integrins by immunoprecipitation ) and plated onto plastic dishes coated with or without 10 mug and ml fibronectin and incubated at 37degreesC for 15 min .
The cells were lysed directly on dishes with ice-cold cell lysis buffer ( 25 mM Hepes-NaOH , pH 7.5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % NP-40 , 0.25 % sodium deoxycholate , 0.1 % SDS , 10 % glycerol , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM DTT , 10 mug and ml aprotinin , and 10 mug and ml leupeptin ) containing 75 mug of GST fused Ras binding domain of c-Raf-1 ( GST-RBD ) .
To examine the effect of collagen I and Sema4D stimulation on R-Ras activity in PC12 cells , 10 6 cells were maintained in RPMI 1640 containing 1 % HS for 12 h , detached with 1.5 mM EDTA in PBS , washed three times with serum-free medium , and resuspended in 10 ml of 1 % BSA in RPMI 1640 with or without Sema4D-Fc .
For samples indicated , cells were treated with 5 mug and ml of monoclonal beta 1 integrin blocking ( P5D2 ) or activating ( 8A2 ) antibody before replating .
Cells were either kept in suspension or plated onto 6-cm plates coated with ( 1 or 10 mug and ml ) or without collagen I and incubated at 37degreesC for 15 min .
The cells were lysed directly on dishes with ice-cold cell lysis buffer , and the lysates were used in a pull-down assay using GST-RBD .
Detection of FAK tyrosine phosphorylation
Detection of tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK was performed as described elsewhere ( ) .
The cells were lysed directly on dishes with ice-cold cell lysis buffer ( 50 mM Tris-HCl , pH 7.5 , 150 mM NaCl , 1 % Triton X-100 , 0.25 % sodium deoxycholate , 10 % glycerol , 1 mM sodium vanadate , 25 mM NaF , 10 mug and ml pepstatin , 1 mM PMSF , 10 mug and ml aprotinin , and 10 mug and ml leupeptin ) containing 4 mug and ml of the polyclonal antibody against FAK , immunoprecipitated for 2 h , and subsequently incubated with protein A-Sepharose beads ( GE Healthcare ) for 1 h at 4degreesC .
Detection of Akt serine phosphorylation
COS-7 cells were maintained in DME with 0.5 % FBS after transfection for 36 h .
We added 20 muM LY294002 directly to the culture medium after transfection and changed it at every 12 h to reduce the basal levels of PI3-K activity .
Cells were directly lysed on dishes with 1x Laemmli sample buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting .
Online supplemental material
Fig .
S1 shows reduction in endogenous R-Ras protein by RNA interference in PC12 cells and requirement of endogenous R-Ras protein in collagen mediated PC12 cell migration .
Online supplemental material is available at http://www.jcb.org/cgi/content/full/jcb.200508204/DC1 .
Supplementary Material
[ Supplemental Material Index ]
